The Book of Hours
Časoslov

1

2

THE BOOK OF HOURS
Časoslov

Rome

At the printing press of the Grottaferrata Monastery
1950

English Edition:
Fairfax, Virginia
Feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos
2022
Revised 2nd Edition: 2024
3

Scripture texts from the
Revised Standard Version, Catholic Edition, 1966,
Second Edition, 2006
Psalms from The Psalms—The Grail translation, 1963
Artwork from the Časoslov, Ruthenian Recension, Rome 1950
A few scripture references, headings and troparia
of more recent additions to the Menologion
not found in the original Roman edition have
been added here and appear in brackets [ ... ].

Revised 2nd Edition: 2024

Eastern Christian Publications
PO Box 146
Fairfax, VA 22038-0146
www.ecpubs.com

ISBN: 978-1-940219-51-6

4

The Church Slavonic typical edition of the
(Časoslov) for the Ruthenian Church was published in 1950.
The original bears this authorization:

With the blessing of
The Holy Apostolic See of Rome.

English Translation according to the First Typical Edition
Concordat cum Originali:
+Most. Rev. Kurt Burnette, PhD, JD, JCL
Bishop of Passaic
Apostolic Administrator of Toronto in the Byzantine Rite
Nihil Obstat:
Very Rev. John S. Custer, SSL, STD

5

Published through the generous support of
Patrons of the ECPubs Guild
Thomas Hartung
Dr. Thomas Krisztinicz
Marlene McCracken
Father Robert Slesinski
Archimandrite Joseph Stanichar
In loving memory of cantor Christine M. Szewczyk
Supporters of the ECPubs Guild
Father John Basarab		
John Boiko			
Christopher Cortese		
Robert and Kyra Gerardi
Holy Annunciation Monastery
Frank and Araceli Hughes

Viktor Jiompkowski
John Matsko
Jorge Machado
Nancy Nunzio
Cindy Sobiesiak
David Varga
Father Mark Woodruff

6

Contents
The Book of Hours
The Order of the Midnight Service
Weekday Midnight Service		
Saturday Midnight Service		
Sunday Midnight Service		

13
41
59

Morning Prayers				

71

The Order of Matins
Weekday and Lenten Matins		
The Praises				
Daily Dismissals			
Sunday and Festal Matins		
The Praises				
Matins for the Departed			

85
127
139
141
158
167

The Order of the Hours
The First Hour				
The Third Hour				
The Sixth Hour				
The Ninth Hour				
The Order of the Midday Service

181
191
203
215
225

The Order of Vespers
The Introductory Psalm			
241
The First Kathisma			
250
Vespers for the Forty Day Fast		
267
Litia					 271
7

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Prayers Before and After Dinner		
Prayers Before and After Supper		

279
280

The Order of Compline
Small Compline				
Great Compline				

283
301

Prayers Before Sleep			

337

Canonicon
Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos 351
Akathist to our sweetest Lord Jesus Christ
373
Akathist to our Most Blessed Lady,
the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary
397
Service to the Archangels and Angels
421
Service to Saint John the Forerunner		
433
Canon to the Most Holy
Theotokos Hodegetria			
445
Service to the Holy Apostles			
454
Service to the Holy Bishop Nicholas		
464
Service to the Precious and Life-Creating
Cross of Christ				
476
Service to All Saints			
490
Service of the Resurrection in the Sixth Tone 501

8

Contents

Troparia, Theotokia
and Kontakia during the Year
Resurrection Troparia of the Eight Tones
with their Theotokia and Hypakoj,
Prokeimena and Kontakia		
Troparia with Theotokia and Kontakia
said on each day of the week
Theotokia and Stavrotheotokia of the
Eight Tones said on Sunday evening
and on Tuesday and Thursday
evening according to the Tone
of the Troparia of the Saint		
Troparia and Kontakia of the Classes
of Saints 			

527
537

543
547

Troparia and Kontakia

of the Lenten and Flowering Triodion
Troparia and Kontakia said from Sunday of
the Publican and Pharisee and for the
Holy Forty Day Fast to Holy Pascha
The Order of the Holy and Great Sunday
of Pascha				
The Hours on Holy Pascha and the
Entire Bright Week			
Vespers on the Holy and Great
Sunday of Pascha			
Troparia, Kontakia and Prokeimena for the
entire Holy Fifty Days (Pentecostarion)

9

559
579
593
596
599

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Menologion
On Signs for Feasts of the Master and of
the Theotokos and of the Saints		
615
The Month of September			
617
The Month of October			
641
The Month of November			
665
The Month of December 			
689
The Month of January			
715
The Month of February			
739
The Month of March			
757
The Month of April				777
The Month of May				
795
The Month of June				
815
The Month of July				
835
The Month of August			
861
We Praise You, O God			
883
The Monastic Rule				885
Paschalia					887
Ruthenian Recension			891

10

The
Book of Hours

11

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

12

THE ORDER OF THE MIDNIGHT
SERVICE
WEEKDAY MIDNIGHT SERVICE
If there is a priest, he says:
Blessed is our God, always, now and ever and forever.
And we say: Amen.
If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
Glory to You, our God, glory to You!
Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, everywhere
present and filling all things, Treasury of Blessings and Giver
of Life, come and dwell within us, cleanse us of all stain, and
save our souls, O gracious One.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us. Three times.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
13

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Most holy Trinity, have mercy on us; Lord, cleanse us of
our sins; Master, forgive our transgressions; Holy One, come
to us and heal our infirmities for Your Name’s sake.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
The priest:
For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
And we: Amen.
Then: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Glory: now and ever:
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

And Psalm 50
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.
14

Weekday Midnight Service

My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge
O see, in guilt was I born,
a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom;
O sprinkle me with hyssop then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervor sustain me,
That I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
15

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth will declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,
Burnt offering from me You would refuse,
My sacrifice a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, O God, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion;
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
(burnt offerings wholly consumed),
Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
[The Seventeenth Kathisma]
Psalm 118
They are happy whose life is blameless,
who follow God’s law!
They are happy who do His will,
seeking Him with all their hearts,
who never do anything evil
but walk in His ways.
You have laid down Your precepts
to be obeyed with care.
May my footsteps be firm
to obey Your statutes.
Then I shall not be put to shame
as I heed Your commands.
I will thank You with an upright heart
as I learn Your decrees.
I will obey Your statutes:
do not forsake me.
16

Weekday Midnight Service

How long shall the young remain sinless?
By obeying Your word
I have sought You with all my heart:
Let me not stray from Your commands.
I treasure Your promise in my heart
lest I sin against You.
Blessed are You, O Lord;
teach me Your statutes.
With my tongue I have recounted
the decrees of Your lips.
I rejoiced to do Your will
as though all riches were mine.
I will ponder all Your precepts
and consider Your paths.
I take delight in Your statutes;
I will not forget Your word.
Bless Your servant and I shall live
and obey Your word.
Open my eyes that I may see
the wonders of Your law.
I am a pilgrim on the earth;
show me Your commands.
My soul is ever consumed
as I long for Your decrees.
You threaten the proud, the accursed,
who turn from Your commands.
Relieve me from scorn and contempt
for I do Your will.
Though princes sit plotting against me
I ponder on Your statutes.
Your will is my delight;
Your statutes are my counselors.
17

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

My soul lies in the dust
By Your word revive me.
I declared my ways and You answered:
teach me Your statutes.
Make me grasp the way of Your precepts
and I will muse on Your wonders.
My soul pines away with grief;
by Your word raise me up.
Keep me from the way of error
and teach me Your law.
I have chosen the way of truth
with Your decrees before me.
I bind myself to do Your will;
Lord, do not disappoint me.
I will run the way of Your commands;
You give freedom to my heart.
Teach me the demands of Your statutes
and I will keep them to the end.
Train me to observe Your law,
to keep it with all my heart.
Guide me in the path of Your commands;
for there is my delight.
Bend my heart to Your will
and not to love of gain.
Keep my eyes from what is false;
by Your word, give me life.
Keep the promise You have made
to the servant who fears You.
Keep me from the scorn I dread,
for Your decrees are good.
See, I long for Your precepts;
then in Your justice, give me life.
18

Weekday Midnight Service

Lord, let Your love come upon me,
the saving help of Your promise.
And I shall answer those who taunt me
for I trust in Your word.
Do not take the word of Your truth from my mouth
for I trust in Your decrees.
I shall always keep Your law
for ever and ever.
I shall walk in the path of freedom
for I seek Your precepts.
I will speak of Your will before kings
and not be abashed.
Your commands have been my delight;
these I have loved.
I will worship Your commands and love them
and ponder Your statutes.
Remember Your word to Your servant
by which You gave me hope.
This is my comfort in sorrow
that Your promise gives me life.
Though the proud may utterly deride me
I keep to Your law.
I remember the decrees of old
and these, Lord, console me.
I am seized with indignation at the wicked
who forsake Your law.
Your statutes have become my song
in the land of exile.
I think of Your name in the night-time
and I keep Your law.
This has been my blessing,
the keeping of Your precepts.
19

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

My part, I have resolved, O Lord,
is to obey Your word.
With all my heart I implore Your favor;
show the mercy of Your promise.
I have pondered over my ways
and returned to Your will.
I made haste and did not delay
to obey Your commands.
Though the nets of the wicked ensnared me
I remembered Your law.
At midnight I will rise and thank You
for Your just decrees.
I am a friend of all who revere You,
who obey Your precepts.
Lord, Your love fills the earth.
Teach me Your statutes.
Lord, You have been good to Your servant
according to Your word.
Teach me discernment and knowledge
for I trust in Your commands.
Before I was afflicted I strayed
but now I keep Your word.
You are good and Your deeds are good;
teach me Your statutes.
Though proud men smear me with lies
yet I keep Your precepts.
Their minds are closed to good
but Your law is my delight.
It was good for me to be afflicted,
to learn Your statutes.
The law from Your mouth means more to me
than silver and gold.
20

Weekday Midnight Service

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
It was Your hands that made me and shaped me;
help me to learn Your commands.
Your faithful will see me and rejoice,
for I trust in Your word.
Lord, I know that Your decrees are right,
that You afflict me justly.
Let Your love be ready to console me
by Your promise to Your servant.
Let Your love come and I shall live
for Your law is my delight.
Shame the proud who harm me with lies
while I ponder Your precepts.
Let Your faithful turn to me,
those who know Your will.
Let my heart be blameless in Your statutes
lest I be ashamed.
I yearn for Your saving help;
I hope in Your word.
My eyes yearn to see Your promise.
When will You console me?
Though parched and exhausted with waiting
I remember Your statutes.
How long must Your servant suffer?
21

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

When will You judge my foes?
For me the proud have dug pitfalls,
against the law.
Your commands are true; then help me
when lies oppress me.
They almost made an end of me on earth
but I kept Your precepts.
Because of Your love give me life
And I will do Your will.
Your word, O Lord, for ever
stands firm in the heavens:
Your truth lasts from age to age
like the earth You created.
By Your decree it endures to this day;
for all things serve You.
Had Your law not been my delight
I would have died in my affliction.
I will never forget Your precepts
for with them You give me life.
Middle
Save me, for I am Yours
since I seek Your precepts.
Though the wicked lie in wait to destroy me
yet I ponder on Your will.
I have seen that all perfection has an end
but Your command is boundless.
Lord, how I love Your law!
It is ever in my mind.
Your command makes me wiser than my foes;
for it is mine forever.
22

Weekday Midnight Service

I have more insight than all who teach me
for I ponder Your will.
I have more understanding than the old
for I keep Your precepts.
I turn my feet from evil paths
to obey Your word.
I have not turned from Your decrees;
You Yourself have taught me.
Your promise is sweeter to my taste
than honey in the mouth.
I gain understanding from Your precepts
and so I hate false ways.
Your word is a lamp to my steps
and a light to my path.
I have sworn and have made up my mind
to obey Your decrees.
Lord, I am deeply afflicted;
by Your word give me life.
Accept, Lord, the homage of my lips
and teach me Your decrees.
Though I carry my life in my hands,
I remember Your law.
Though the wicked try to ensnare me
I do not stray from Your precepts.
Your will is my heritage for ever,
the joy of my heart.
I set myself to carry out Your statutes
in fullness for ever.
I have no love for half-hearted men:
my love is for Your law.
You are my shelter, my shield;
23

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

I hope in Your word.
Leave me, You who do evil;
I will keep God’s command.
If You uphold me by Your promise I shall live;
let my hopes be not in vain.
Sustain me and I shall be saved
and ever observe Your statutes.
You spurn all who swerve from Your statutes;
their cunning is in vain.
You throw away the wicked like dross;
so I love Your will.
I tremble before You in terror;
I fear Your decrees.
I have done what is right and just;
let me not be oppressed.
Vouch for the welfare of Your servant
lest the proud oppress me.
My eyes yearn for Your saving help
and the promise of Your justice.
Treat Your servant with love
and teach me Your statutes.
I am Your servant, give me knowledge;
then I shall know Your will.
It is time for the Lord to act
for Your law has been broken.
That is why I love Your commands
more than finest gold,
why I rule my life by Your precepts;
and hate false ways.
Your will is wonderful indeed;
therefore I obey it.
The unfolding of Your word gives light
24

Weekday Midnight Service

and teaches the simple.
I open my mouth and sigh
as I yearn for Your commands.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Turn and show me Your mercy;
show justice to Your friends.
Let my steps be guided by Your promise;
let no evil rule me.
Redeem me from man’s oppression
and I will keep Your precepts.
Let Your face shine on Your servant
and teach me Your decrees.
Tears stream from my eyes
because Your law is disobeyed.
Lord, You are just indeed;
Your decrees are right.
You have imposed Your will with justice
and with absolute truth.
I am carried away by anger
for my foes forget Your word.
Your promise is tried in the fire,
the delight of Your servant.
Although I am weak and despised
I remember Your precepts.
25

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Your justice is eternal justice
and Your law is truth.
Though anguish and distress have seized me,
I delight in Your commands.
The justice of Your will is eternal;
if You teach me, I shall live.
I call with all my heart; Lord, hear me,
I will keep Your statutes.
I call upon You; save me
and I will do Your will.
I rise before dawn and cry for help,
I hope in Your word.
My eyes watch through the night
to ponder Your promise.
In Your love hear my voice, O Lord;
give me life by Your decrees.
Those who harm me unjustly draw near;
they are far from Your law.
But You, O Lord, are close:
Your commands are truth.
Long have I known that Your will
is established for ever.
See my affliction and save me
for I remember Your law.
Uphold my cause and defend me;
by Your promise, give me life.
Salvation is far from the wicked
who are heedless of Your statutes.
Numberless, Lord, are Your mercies;
with Your decrees give me life.
Though my foes and oppressors are countless
26

Weekday Midnight Service

I have not swerved from Your will.
I look at the faithless with disgust;
they ignore Your promise.
See how I love Your precepts;
In Your mercy give me life.
Your word is founded on truth;
Your decrees are eternal.
Though princes oppress me without cause
I stand in awe of Your word.
I take delight in Your promise
like the one who finds a treasure.
Lies I hate and detest
but Your law is my love.
Seven times a day I praise You
for Your just decrees.
The lovers of Your law have great peace;
they never stumble.
I await Your saving help, O Lord,
I fulfill Your commands.
My soul obeys Your will
and loves it dearly.
I obey Your precepts and Your will;
all that I do is before You.
Lord, let my cry come before You;
teach me by Your word.
Let my pleading come before You;
save me by Your promise.
Let my lips proclaim Your praise
because You teach me Your statutes.
Let my tongue sing Your promise
for Your commands are just.
27

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let Your hand be ready to help me,
since I have chosen Your precepts.
Lord, how I long for Your saving help
and Your law is my delight.
Give life to my soul that I may praise You.
Let Your decrees give me help.
I am a lost sheep; seek Your servant
for I remember Your commands.
Glory: now and ever:
[The Symbol of Faith]
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator of
heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, the only-begotten, born
of the Father before all ages. Light from light, true God from
true God, begotten, not made, one in essence with the Father;
through Whom all things were made. For us men and for our
salvation, He came down from heaven, and was incarnate from
the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man. He was
crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was
buried. He rose on the third day according to the scriptures.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; and He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. And in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of Life, Who proceeds from the
Father. Together with the Father and the Son He is worshiped
and glorified; He spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I profess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead and the
life of the world to come. Amen.
The Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father:
28

Weekday Midnight Service

The priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
Then the troparia, Tone 8:
Behold, the Bridegroom comes in the middle of the night.
Blessed is the servant He shall find awake, but the one He
shall find neglectful will not be worthy of Him. Beware,
therefore, O my soul! Do not fall into a deep slumber, lest
you be delivered to death and the door of the Kingdom be
closed to you. Watch, instead, and cry out: Holy, holy, holy
are You, O God. Through the intercession of the Theotokos,
have mercy on us.
Glory:
Be alert, O my soul, as you think of that awesome day!
Light your lamp and keep it filled with oil, for you do not
know the hour in which the cry will come: “Behold the
Bridegroom!” Beware that you do not fall back to sleep, O my
soul, and wake up on the outside, like those five virgins. But
watch constantly and you will see Christ! He will lead you to
the banquet hall of His glory.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Virgin Theotokos, fortress of salvation and invincible
wall, we pray to you: confound the enemies’ counsels, turn
your people’s sorrow to joy, protect your city. Strengthen the
government (or God-protected King), and pray for peace in
the world, for you are our hope, O Theotokos.
Then Lord, have mercy. 40.

29

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And this prayer:
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.

30

Weekday Midnight Service

If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ our God, have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
_________________________________________________
And if it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung], say this
prayer of Saint Ephrem, making a great prostration after each
of the three parts:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit
of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
And again, this prayer a final time:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen. And one great prostration.
_________________________________________________
31

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, this prayer:
[Prayer to the Holy Trinity by Saint Mardarius]
O God, Master, Almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord
Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, One God, One Power,
have mercy on me, a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy
servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are
blessed forever and ever. Amen.
However, if it is not a period of Alleluia, omit Lord and
Master of my life: and the bows and say only: O God our
Master, Almighty Father:
[Mesorion]
Then Come, let us worship: Three times
And the psalms:

Psalm 120
I lift up my eyes to the mountains;
from where shall come my help?
My help is from the Lord
Who made heaven and earth.
May He never allow you to stumble!
Let Him sleep not your guard.
No, He sleeps not nor stumbles,
Israel’s guard.
The Lord is your guard and your shade;
on your right hand He stands.
By day the sun shall not smite you
nor the moon in the night.
32

Weekday Midnight Service

The Lord will guard you from evil,
He will guard your soul.
The Lord will guard your going and coming
both now and for ever.

Psalm 133
O come, bless the Lord,
all you who serve the Lord,
Who stand in the house of the Lord,
in the courts of the house of our God.
Lift up your hands to the holy place
and bless the Lord through the night.
May the Lord bless you from Zion,
He who made both heaven and earth.
Glory: now and ever:
Trisagion: Most Holy Trinity: and after Our Father: For
Thine is the kingdom:
And these troparia, Tone 2:
O Lord, in Your goodness, remember Your servants and
forgive whatever sins they committed in their life; for no one
is sinless but You alone. You have the power to grant rest to
the departed.
[Tone 8]
In the depth of Your wisdom, O only Creator, You govern
all with love and supply the needs of each. Now give rest to
the souls of Your servants, for they have placed their hope in
You, our Creator, Maker, and our God.
33

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: Kontakion:
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
All generations call you blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, for
Christ our God, the Uncontainable, willed to be contained in
you. We also are blessed having you as a mediatrix, for day
and night you pray for us. The authority of governments is
upheld through your prayers. Therefore, with hymns we cry
out to you: Rejoice, full of grace, the Lord is with you.
Lord, have mercy. 12.
And this prayer:
O Lord, remember our departed fathers and brothers and
sisters who have fallen asleep in the hope of resurrection to
eternal life and all who have been made perfect in piety and
faith, and forgive them all their sins voluntary or involuntary,
by word, deed, or thought. Let their dwelling place be a place
of light, joy, and peace, where there is no pain, sorrow, nor
mourning, where the light of Your countenance shines forth
and gladdens all Your saints from the ages. Bestow Your
kingdom upon them and upon us. Grant that we may share
the good things of eternity, those delights which words cannot
describe, the delights of eternal happiness. For You are the
resurrection, the life, and the repose of Your departed servants,
O Christ our God, and we give glory to You with Your eternal
Father, and Your all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now
and ever and forever. Amen.
34

Weekday Midnight Service

On holy Mount Athos, after O Lord, remember: the
following troparia are said, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
Then the priest says the ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Again, let us pray that He preserve this city (or this village)
and this holy church (if at a monastery: this holy monastery)
and every city, town, and community from famine, plague,
earthquake, flood, fire, civil war, riot, and foreign invasion;
and that our God Who is kindly and the Lover of Mankind
35

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

may forgive our sins and hold back His just wrath, and that He
may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy 12.
Exclamation:
Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all the ends of the
earth and of those who are far away upon the sea, and be
merciful, be merciful, Master, regarding our sins, and have
mercy on us. For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
[The Dismissal]
The priest:
Glory to You, O Christ God, our hope, glory to You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three
times. Give the blessing.
The priest says the dismissal:
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; of our venerable
and God-bearing fathers; and through the prayers of all the
saints; for Christ is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
After the dismissal the priest makes a bow to the brethren,
saying:

36

Weekday Midnight Service

Honorable fathers and brothers, bless and forgive me, a
sinner. I have sinned this day (this night) and all the days of
my life, in word, deed, or thought, with all my spiritual and
bodily faculties.
And all the brethren respond thus:
Honorable father: may God forgive you and have mercy
on you.
After this all the brethren make a bow to the superior or
the priest, asking pardon:
Honorable father, bless and forgive me, a sinner. I have
sinned this day (this night) and all the days of my life, in word,
deed, or thought, with all my spiritual and bodily faculties.
The superior or priest responds:
May God forgive your sins by His grace and have mercy
on all of you.
Then the superior or priest says the following:
Let us pray for our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome.
Choir: May God save and have mercy!
For our government.
May God save and have mercy!
(or For our God-protected Emperor or King (Name).
May God protect the power of his kingdom.)
37

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
For our God-loving Bishop (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
For all bishops of the Catholic Church.
May God save and have mercy!
For the worthy founders [and benefactors] of this holy
church (or: this holy monastery).
May God save and have mercy!
For our most venerable Proto-archimandrite (Name),
our Archimandrite (Name), our Proto-hegumen (Name), and
Hegumen (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
For our spiritual fathers and all our brothers and sisters
in Christ.
May God save and have mercy!
For the absent and those sent on business.
May God protect and have mercy!
For those who are kind to us.
May God reward and have mercy!
For those who did or now serve in this holy church (or:
this holy monastery).
May God save and have mercy!
For those who hate us, and those who love us.
May God forgive and have mercy!
38

Weekday Midnight Service

For the deliverance of prisoners.
May God grant freedom and have mercy!
For those who travel by sea, land, or air.
May God direct their journey!
For the ill and suffering.
May God cure them and have mercy!
For the afflicted and the imprisoned.
May God visit them and have mercy!
For all Christians of the true faith.
May God save and have mercy!
For an abundance of the fruits of the earth.
May God increase the fruits of the earth!
If it is Sunday or a feast or a solemn commemoration of
a saint, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
But, if it is not Sunday or a solemn commemoration of a
saint, say this for the departed:
Let us remember the founders of this holy church (or this
holy monastery).
May God remember them and give them rest!
Our parents and relatives.
May God remember them and give them rest!
39

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Our departed fathers and brethren.
May God remember them and give them rest!
Those who died in war for the Catholic faith.
May God remember them and give them rest!
For those buried or enrolled here, and for Christians of the
true faith everywhere.
May their memory be eternal!
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

40

SATURDAY MIDNIGHT SERVICE
The priest says: Blessed is our God: And we say: Amen.
Glory to You, our God, glory to You! Heavenly King:
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: The priest: For
Thine is the kingdom: And we: Amen. Then: Lord, have
mercy. 12.
Glory: now and ever:
Come, let us worship: Three times.
Then Psalm 50:
Have mercy on me, God: see page 14.
After the 50th Psalm, the 9th Kathisma.
[First Stasis]

Psalm 64
To You our praise is due
in Zion, O God.
To You we pay our vows,
You Who hear our prayer.
To You all flesh will come
with its burden of sin.
Too heavy for us, our offenses,
but You wipe them away.
41

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Blessed is he whom You choose and call
to dwell in Your courts.
We are filled with the blessing of Your house,
to dwell in Your courts.
We are filled with the blessing of Your house,
of Your holy temple.
You keep Your pledge with wonders,
O God our Savior,
the hope of all the earth
and of far distant isles.
You uphold the mountains with Your strength,
You are girded with power.
You still the roaring of the seas,
(the roaring of their waves)
and the tumult of the peoples.
The ends of the earth stand in awe
at the sight of Your wonders.
The lands of sunrise and sunset
You fill with Your joy.
You care for the earth, give it water,
You fill it with riches.
Your river in heaven brims over
to provide its grain.
And thus You provide for the earth;
You drench its furrows,
You level it, soften it with showers,
You bless its growth.
42

Saturday Midnight Service

You crown the year with Your goodness.
Abundance flows in Your steps,
in the pastures of the wilderness it flows.
The hills are girded with joy,
the meadows covered with flocks,
the valleys are decked with wheat.
They shout for joy, yes, they sing.

Psalm 65
Shout joyfully to the Lord, all the earth;
sing praise to his name,
give to him glorious praise.
Say to God: ‘How tremendous Your deeds!
Because of the greatness of Your strength
Your enemies cringe before You.
Before You all the earth shall bow;
shall sing to You, sing to Your name!’
Come and see the works of God,
tremendous His deeds among men.
He turned the sea into dry land,
they passed through the river dry-shod.
Let our joy then be in Him;
He rules forever by His might.
His eyes keep watch over the nations;
let rebels not rise against Him.

43

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O peoples, bless our God,
let the voice of His praise resound,
of the God Who gave life to our souls
and kept our feet from stumbling.
For You, O God, have tested us,
You have tried us as silver is tried:
You led us, God, into the snare;
You laid a heavy burden on our backs.
You let men ride over our heads;
we went through fire and through water
but then You brought us relief.
Burnt offering I bring to Your house;
to You I will pay my vows,
the vows which my lips have uttered,
which my mouth spoke in my distress.
I will offer burnt offerings of fatlings
with the smoke of burning rams.
I will offer bullocks and goats.
Come and hear, all who fear God.
I will tell what He did for my soul:
to Him I cried aloud,
with high praise ready on my tongue.
If there had been evil in my heart,
the Lord would not have listened.
But truly God has listened;
He has heeded the voice of my prayer.
44

Saturday Midnight Service

Blessed be God Who did not reject my prayer
nor withhold His love from me.

Psalm 66
Be gracious to us, O God, and bless us;
let your face shine upon us, and have mercy on us.
So will Your ways be known upon earth
and all nations learn Your saving help.
Let the peoples praise You, O God;
let all the peoples praise You.
Let the nations be glad and exalt
for You rule the world with justice.
With fairness You rule the peoples,
You guide the nations on earth.
Let the peoples praise You, O God;
let all the peoples praise You.
The earth has yielded its fruit
for God, our God has blessed us.
May God still give us His blessing
till the ends of the earth revere Him.
Let the peoples praise You, O God;
let all the peoples praise You.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
45

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
[Second Stasis]

Psalm 67
Let God arise, let His foes be scattered.
Let those who hate Him flee before Him.
As smoke is blown away so will they be blown away;
like wax that melts before the fire,
so the wicked shall perish at the presence of God.
But the just shall rejoice at the presence of God,
they shall exalt and dance for joy.
O sing to the Lord, make music to His name;
make a highway for Him Who rides on the clouds.
Rejoice in the Lord, exalt at His presence.
Father of the orphan, defender of the widow,
such is God in His holy place.
God gives the lonely a home to live in;
He leads the prisoners forth into freedom,
but the rebels must dwell in a parched land.
When You went forth, O God, at the head of Your people,
when You marched across the desert, the earth trembled,
the heavens melted at the presence of God,
at the presence of God, Israel’s God.
You poured down, O God, a generous rain;
when Your people were starved You gave them new life.
46

Saturday Midnight Service

It was there that Your people found a home,
prepared in Your goodness, O God, for the poor.
The Lord gives the word to bearers of good tidings:
‘The Almighty has defeated a numberless army
and kings and armies are in flight, in flight
while You were at rest among the sheepfolds.’
At home the women alr eady share the spoil.
They are covered with silver as the wings of a dove,
its feathers brilliant with shining gold
and jewels flashing like snow on Mount Zalmon.
The mountains of Bashan are mighty mountains;
high-ridged mountains are the mountains of Bashan.
Why look with envy, you high-ridged mountains,
at the mountain where God has chosen to dwell?
It is there that the Lord shall dwell forever.
The chariots of God are thousands upon thousands.
The Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.
You have gone up on high; You have taken captives,
receiving men in tribute, O God,
even those who rebel, into Your dwelling, O Lord.
May the Lord be blessed day after day.
He bears our burdens, God our Savior.
This God of ours is a God Who saves.
The Lord our God holds the keys of death.
And God will smite the head of His foes,
the crown of those who persist in their sins.

47

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Lord said: ‘I will bring them back from Bashan;
I will bring them back from the depth of the sea.
Then your feet will tread in their blood
and the tongues of your dogs take their share of the foe.’
See Your solemn procession, O God,
the procession of my God, of my king, to the sanctuary;
the singers in the forefront, the musicians coming last,
between them, maidens sounding their timbrels.
‘In festive gatherings, bless the Lord;
bless God, O you who are Israel’s sons.’
There is Benjamin, least of the tribes, at the head,
Judah’s princes, a mighty throng,
Zebulun’s princes, Naphtali’s princes.
Show forth, O God, show forth Your might,
Your might, O God, which You have shown for us;
for the sake of Your temple high in Jerusalem
may kings come to You bringing their tribute.
Threaten the wild beast that dwells in the reeds,
the band of the mighty and lords of the peoples.
Let them bow down offering silver.
Scatter the peoples who delight in war.
Princes will make their way from Egypt;
Ethiopia will stretch out her hands to God.
Kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, praise the Lord
who rides on the heavens, the ancient heavens.
He thunders His voice, His mighty voice.
Come, acknowledge the power of God.
48

Saturday Midnight Service

His glory is on Israel; His might is in the skies.
God is to be feared in His holy place.
He is the Lord, Israel’s God.
He gives strength and power to His people.
Blessed be God!
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
[Third Stasis]

Psalm 68
Save me, O God,
for the waters have risen to my neck.
I have sunk into the mud of the deep
and there is no foothold.
I have entered the waters of the deep
and the waves overwhelm me.
I am wearied with all my crying,
my throat is parched.
My eyes are wasted away
from looking for my God.

49

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

More numerous than the hairs on my head
are those who hate me without cause.
Those who attack me with lies
are too much for my strength.
How can I restore
what I have never stolen?
O God You know my sinful folly;
my sins You can see.
Let those who hope in You not be put to shame
through me, Lord of hosts;
let not those who seek You be dismayed
through me, God of Israel.
It is for You that I suffer taunts,
that shame covers my face,
that I have become a stranger to my brothers,
an alien to my own mother’s sons.
I burn with zeal for Your house
and taunts against You fall on me.
When I afflict my soul with fasting
they make it a taunt against me.
When I put on sackcloth in mourning
then they make me a byword,
the gossip of men at the gates,
the subject of drunkards’ songs.
This is my prayer to You,
my prayer for Your favor.
In Your great love, answer me, O God,
with Your help that never fails;
50

Saturday Midnight Service

rescue me from sinking in the mud;
save me from my foes.
Save me from the waters of the deep
lest the waves overwhelm me.
Do not let the deep engulf me
nor death close its mouth on me.
Lord, answer, for Your love is kind;
in Your compassion, turn towards me.
Do not hide Your face from Your servant;
answer quickly for I am in distress.
Come close to my soul and redeem me;
ransom me pressed by my foes.
You know how they taunt and deride me;
my oppressors are all before You.
Taunts have broken my heart;
I have reached the end of my strength.
I looked in vain for compassion,
for consolers; not one could I find.
For food they gave me poison;
in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Let their table be a snare to them
and their festive banquets a trap.
Let their eyes grow dim and blind;
let their limbs tremble and shake.
Pour out Your anger upon them,
let the heat of Your fury overtake them.
Let their camp be left desolate;
let no one dwell in their tents;
51

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For they persecute one whom You struck;
they increase the pain of him You wounded.
Charge them with guilt upon guilt;
let them never be found just in Your sight.
Blot them out from the book of the living;
do not enroll them among the just.
As for me in my poverty and pain
let Your help, O God, lift me up.
I will praise God’s name with a song;
I will glorify Him with thanksgiving.
A gift pleasing God more than oxen,
more than beasts prepared for sacrifice.
The poor when they see it will be glad
and God-seeking hearts will revive;
for the Lord listens to the needy
and does not spurn His servants in their chains.
Let the heavens and the earth give Him praise,
the sea and all its living creatures.
For God will bring help to Zion
and rebuild the cities of Judah
and men shall dwell there in possession.
The sons of His servants shall inherit it;
those who love His name shall dwell there.

52

Saturday Midnight Service

Psalm 69
O God, make haste to my rescue,
Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion
on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,
who delight in my harm,
let them retreat, covered with shame,
who jeer at my lot.
Let there be rejoicing and gladness
for all who seek You.
Let them say for ever: ‘God is great,’
who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,
come to me, O God.
You are my rescuer, my help,
O Lord, do not delay.
Glory: now and ever: and immediately I believe in one
God: see page 28. Then, the Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity:
Our Father: For Thine is the kingdom:
And these troparia, Tone 2:
O uncreated Nature and I agree OK so then we’re we’re
both in agreement that the one on page 53 is the one that it
should be on 1O8 , open our mouths so that we may proclaim
Your praise by singing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God.
Through the prayers of Your apostles, prophets, and martyrs
have mercy on us.
53

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
On earth we imitate the Powers on high, and we offer our
hymn of victory to You, O Gracious One, singing: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your saints
have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
O Lord, You have lifted me up from my bed and from
sleep, now enlighten my mind, open my heart and my lips that
I may sing to You, Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O
God. Through the prayers of the Theotokos, have mercy on
us.
Then Lord, have mercy. 40.
And this prayer:
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
54

Saturday Midnight Service

Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.
If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ our God, have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
[Prayer to the Holy Trinity by Saint Mardarius]
O God, Master, Almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord
Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, One God, One Power,
have mercy on me, a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy
servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are
blessed forever and ever. Amen.
And the following prayer of Saint Eustratius.
I exalt and magnify You, O Lord, for You have looked on
my lowliness, and You did not permit me to fall into the hands
of my enemies, but instead, You saved my soul from distress.
And now, O Master, may Your hand be over me to protect
me, and let Your mercy descend upon me, for the thought
55

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

of leaving my wretched and defiled body fills my soul with
anguish and apprehension lest the evil design of the adversary
come upon it and plunge my soul into the darkness for the
sins I have committed in this life through ignorance or with
knowledge. Be merciful to me, O Master, and spare my soul
the dark sight of evil demons, but let it be received by Your
bright and shining angels. Give glory to Your holy Name, and
by Your power lead me to Your divine judgment-seat. When
You judge me, do not let the prince of this world seize and
throw my soul into the depths of hell but stand by me and
be my Savior and Protector. In hope of this, my physical
sufferings have become a joy to Your servant. Have mercy,
O Lord, on my soul, defiled by the passions of this life and
receive it purified by repentance and confession, for You are
blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Then: Come, let us worship: three times, and the psalms:
I lift up my eyes to the mountains:
O come, bless the Lord:
Glory: now and ever:
Trisagion. Most holy Trinity: Our Father: For Thine is
the kingdom: And the troparia: O Lord, in Your goodness:
[and] In the depth of Your wisdom:
Glory: With the saints, O Christ, give rest:
Now and ever: All generations bless you, O Virgin
Theotokos:
Lord, have mercy. 12.
O Lord, remember our deceased fathers and brethren:
56

Saturday Midnight Service

And the rest of the service appears previously for the
weekday midnight service, pages 32 to 40.
The dismissal from the priest, and the remainder.

57

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

SUNDAY MIDNIGHT SERVICE
58

Sunday Midnight Service
SUNDAY MIDNIGHT SERVICE
The priest says: Blessed is our God:
And we say: Amen. Glory to You, our God, glory to You!
Heavenly King: Trisagion. Most holy Trinity: Our Father:
The priest: For Thine is the kingdom: And we: Amen.
Then: Lord, have mercy. 12. Glory: now and ever: Come, let
us worship: three times.
Psalm 50. Have mercy on me, God: see page 14.
And immediately we say the canon of the Most Holy and
Life-creating Trinity.

Canon of the Trinity
compiled from all the Eight Tones
Tone 1. Ode 1.
Irmos. In Your divine majesty, Your right hand, O Lord,
is made glorious in power! In its almighty power, O Immortal
One, it has crushed the enemies! It has cut a new path for the
people of Israel!
Versicle: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, glory to You!
The seraphim are never silent glorifying the one Godhead
in Three Persons. Eternal, incomprehensible, ever-existing
and the Maker of all things, every tongue with faith praises
You in song.
59

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

In the past, in creating man, You fashioned him after Your
own image in order to reveal Your single divinity and threefold Radiance. As a Lover of Mankind, You endowed him
with intelligence, reason, and spirit.
Glory:
You again showed one power in three divine Persons,
O Father, when You said to Your Son and Your Spirit, equal
in operation: “Come, let Us go down and confound their
tongues”.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
The unbegotten Father, as Intelligence, spoke figuratively
to the sages of old of the Word, the co-eternal, consubsisting
Son and the Holy Spirit Who is the Author of the incarnation
of the Word in the Virgin.

Tone 2. Ode 3.
Irmos. You have strengthened me on the rock of faith,
and You have made me heard over my enemies. My spirit
rejoiced in singing: “There is none as holy as our God; none
more just than You, O Lord”.
Because of identity of nature, O God, I glorify You with
equal honor in the Persons. Life from life, Who proceeded
eternally, You are our only God, and there is none as holy as
You.
O Trinity, indivisible Unity, You created the immaterial
heavenly hosts, the reflection of Your beauty, to sing Your
praises without ceasing. Now accept our praise from our lips
of clay.
60

Sunday Midnight Service

Glory:
On the rock of faith strengthen us, and by the sea of Your
love open the hearts and minds of Your servants, O Unity with
Three Suns. For You are our God in Whom we hope. May we
not be put to shame.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
He Who once gave being to everything in creation,
because of His ineffable goodness, took human substance in
your womb, O Theotokos. And the Three-Sun Light of the one
Divinity and Lordship arose for all.

Sessional Hymn, Tone 2:
According to: Compassionate:
)
(Blahoutrobija:
In the beginning, when You fashioned Adam, O
Compassionate Lord, You said to Your Hypostatic Word: “Let
Us make him according to Our likeness.” And the Holy Spirit
was also present creating with You. Therefore, we cry out to
You: “O Creator, our God, glory to You!”
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O most pure one, when God deigned to come to us, He
made His dwelling in your most pure womb. Through you, He
saved mankind and bestowed the kingdom of heaven upon all.
Therefore, we sing to you, O pure Mother of God, “Rejoice,
O Lady!”

61

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Tone 3. Ode 4.
Irmos. You have established a firm love for us, O Lord,
when You delivered Your only-begotten Son to death for us.
Therefore, we cry out in thanksgiving to You: “Glory to Your
power, O Lord!”
A two-fold Sprout grew from the Father as from the
root: the Son and the upright Spirit. Growths of the same
divine nature, Flowers without beginning, They are the Three
Radiances of the Godhead. Twice.
Glory:
O incomprehensible God, the multitude of spiritual beings
unceasingly praises You. We glorify You with them, saying:
“O Trinity beyond all being, as the Lover of Mankind, save
Your servants.”
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You enflamed love for You in us, O all-merciful Word
of God. Without change You took flesh without change for
our sake and taught us the mystery of the one Thrice-Radiant
Godhead. Therefore, we glorify You.

Tone 4. Ode 5.
Irmos. All creation stood in amazement at your heavengiven glory, O Virgin bride, for the transcendent God was in
your womb, and you bore the Timeless Son. To all who sing
your praises you give peace.
From faith we know of the all-creating Divinity, its one
and inaccessible Being and its Three Persons, Source of life
62

Sunday Midnight Service

united in nature. We honor the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, co-eternal Being.
Thrice-Radiant Divinity, the light of Your essential
radiance which makes Your oneness shine clear for me,
uncreated Being and illuminating Source of all light-giving
rays, let me gaze upon Your ineffable beauty.
Glory:
Since You are the One Who created all things, hold all
things together, all-wise true Pilot of the whole world, and are
the Giver of life, we cry out in faith to You: “O Thrice-Radiant
Master, guard us who sing Your praises.”
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Wanting to make once-corrupted humanity God-like, the
One Who in His goodness fashioned and showed the image
of the divine form, became man from you, O Virgin, and
proclaimed the Godhead one in three.

Tone 5. Ode 6.
Irmos. Calm the sea raging with the soul-corrupting
waves of my passions, O Christ the Master; and in Your mercy
bring me forth from corruption.
O Hypostatic Deity, though Thrice-Radiant, Yours is one
form, equal in operation, one essence, and [one] will.
The prophet singing to the Father: In Your Light we shall
see the Light, Your Son, by the Spirit, revealed One God in
Three Radiances.
63

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
Uncomplex being in Three Persons, You possess one
power and might, through which all creation is renewed.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Lord God, One in Three Radiances, send down upon
those who sing to You, deliverance from sin and danger
through the prayers of the Mother of God.

Sessional Hymn, Tone 5:
According to: Let us the faithful praise the Word:
(Sobeznačalnoje Slovo:  
)
Let us glorify the Light in Three Suns and now worship
the oneness of the Trinity, for the Trinity enlightened us and
showed us mercy, and delivered the whole human race from
corruption, delivered the entire world from the error of idols,
and bestowed the Kingdom upon us.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Those deprived of all things flee to you, hope of all, refuge
of sinners and the lowly, crying: We have sinned but remain in
our wickedness, we unfeeling wretches. Have mercy on me,
the unworthy one, and deliver me before the end from every
punishment.

Tone 6. Ode 7.
Irmos. The angel made the furnace shower dew on the
righteous young men. The command of God consuming the
Chaldeans convinced the despot to cry out: “Blessed are You,
O God of our fathers!”
64

Sunday Midnight Service

O Unity expressed in Three Radiances, give me strength
of mind to keep and observe Your divine commands and with
faith always to sing to You: “Blessed are You, O God of our
fathers!”
O God praised as One because of identity of nature, yet
Three in Person, preserve us all from every kind of temptation
and assault.
Glory:
We glorify You, our God, one in being, consubstantial and
co-eternal with unconfused individual Hypostases, O Trinity,
simply presenting the distinction with substance clearly
unchanged.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O most pure one, the supernatural God in His love for
mankind clearly took our nature from your pure womb and
taught all to cry out, “Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!”

Tone 7. Ode 8.
Irmos. A bush with undevouring fire communed with
slow-tongued, stuttering Moses on Sinai and made God
known to him. And the three young men showed zeal for
God, singing unharmed in the fire: “All you works of the Lord
praise the Lord, and exalt Him above all forever!”
Grant the hearts of those who sing Your praises to be
enlightened by the illuminating rays of the Three-fold Radiant
Sun. And now, Trinity in Unity, make it possible for all who
with fitting faith sing Your greatness through all ages to see
Your beauty.
65

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Power without beginning, Three yet One, You hold
everything and govern heaven and earth. Therefore, ever
drawn by [the spell of] Your love, preserve me to sing to You:
“All you works of the Lord, praise the Lord, and exalt Him
above all forever!”
Glory:
Loving, beneficent Lord, make me a temple of Your threefold radiant Light, of Your fellowship and communion with
You, unapproachable to invisible enemies and passions of the
flesh. Master, my God, sole Ruler and Lord of glory, show me
how to sing Your praises forever.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O most pure Mother of God, the Divine Light which rose
from your womb illuminated the whole world with threefold radiant Light and showed the earth like another heaven,
singing: “All you works of the Lord, praise the Lord, and exalt
Him above all forever!”

Tone 8. Ode 9.
Irmos. Heaven was astonished and the ends of the earth
were amazed that God appeared to mankind in a body. Your
womb became more spacious than the heavens. Therefore,
captains of angels and humans extol you as the Theotokos.
As we now praise You, the Nature which rules all things,
creates all things, is beyond all beginning, above time, lifecreating, merciful, Lover of Mankind, good, and a Unity in
Trinity, we beg forgiveness of sins, peace to the world and
harmony to the churches. Twice.
66

Sunday Midnight Service

Glory:
One Lordship with three Radiances; One Deity with three
Suns; graciously receive those who sing Your praises. Deliver
them from offenses and from grievous temptations. Hasten to
grant peace to the world and unity to the churches, O You
Who love mankind.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
By dwelling in a virgin’s womb, O Christ, my Savior, You
appeared to the world as the God-man, truly unchanged and
unconfused. You clearly promised to be with Your servants
always. Therefore, through the prayers of the one who bore
You, grant peace to all Your flock.
Then, these troparia:
[Composed by Saint Gregory of Sinai]
It is proper to give You divine glory, O Holy Trinity,
indivisible and beyond all being, our all-good God, Whom all
peoples of earth sing and the powers of heaven glorify. You
are worshiped in faith by all, in essence the Oneness of Three
Persons.
Lordship beyond the cherubim and Divinity without
compare beyond the seraphim, indivisible Trinity in Oneness,
Godhead indeed, we exalt You.
I worship the eternal Father and God, the coeternal Word
and Spirit, the indivisible one uniting Being. Let us sing a
hymn of praise to the Triune Unity.

67

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Piously in song and with hymns befitting God, let us all
sing the praises of the Father, and of the Son, and of the divine
Spirit, Power in Three Persons, the one kingdom and lordship.
Illuminate me by Your luminous rays, my God, Cause
of all in Three Persons. Show me the bright, luminous,
unchanging abode of Your inaccessible glory.
In fear let us glorify Christ the Giver of Life Who ineffably
was incarnate of the Virgin; hosts of angels praise Him, and
before Him the cherubim shake and tremble.
It is proper to implore You with tears in all reverences,
the all-merciful, and the all-generous Lord, and Savior of our
souls.
O King, accept the tears, accept the groans and weeping,
wretch though I am, and deliver me from the flames and outer
darkness, and make me a participant of the heavenly kingdom.
Glory:
Almighty Father, Word of God, All-Holy Spirit, one
power and image, one kingship, divinity and authority, have
mercy on those who worship You, and save them.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Beholding your Son risen from the dead as befits God,
most pure Virgin, all creation was filled with ineffable joy. In
glorifying Him we extol you.

68

Sunday Midnight Service

After this, It is truly proper: Trisagion. After Our Father:
the Hypakoj of the tone of the week or the troparia: Have
mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us. See pp. 35. Lord,
have mercy. 40. Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. 3.
Give the blessing.
And the dismissal and the usual forgiveness service,
see pp. 36 – 37.
Then, the priest says:
Let us pray for our holy: and the remainder as on pp.
37 - 39.

69

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

70

MORNING PRAYERS
If there is a priest, he says:
Blessed is our God, always, now and ever and forever.
If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
Glory to You, our God, glory to You!
Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, everywhere
present and filling all things, Treasury of Blessings and Giver
of Life, come and dwell within us, cleanse us of all stain, and
save our souls, O gracious One.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us. Three times.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Most holy Trinity, have mercy on us; Lord, cleanse us of
our sins; Master, forgive our transgressions; Holy One, come
to us and heal our infirmities for Your Name’s sake.
71

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
The priest:
For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
And we: Amen.

Troparia of the Trinity
Awakening from sleep, we worship You, O blessed One,
and offer the angelic hymn to You, O powerful One: Holy,
holy, holy are You, O God! Through the intercession of Your
heavenly hosts, have mercy on us.
Glory:
O Lord, You have lifted me up from my bed and from
sleep, now enlighten my mind and heart, and open my lips
that I may sing to You, Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You,
O God! Through the prayers of all Your saints, have mercy
on us.
Now and ever:
The Judge shall come suddenly and the deeds of all shall
be brought to light. In fear we cry out at midnight: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God! Through the prayers of the Theotokos,
have mercy on us.
72

Morning Prayers

Lord, have mercy. 12.
And this prayer:
[Prayer to the Trinity by Saint Basil the Great]
Rising from sleep, I give thanks to You, O Holy Trinity,
because of Your great goodness and endless patience. You did
not become angry with me, a slothful and sinful being, nor did
You destroy me because of my transgressions. But, as always,
You have shown Your love for mankind and have raised
me up as I lay in despair so that I might recite the prayers
of the morning and sing the praises of Your power. And
now, enlighten the eyes of my understanding so that I may
meditate on Your words, understand Your commandments,
and accomplish Your will. Open my mouth so that I may sing
to You in sincere praise, and that I may proclaim Your most
holy Name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and
forever. Amen.
Then: Come, let us worship: three times.

Psalm 50
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.
My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
73

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt was I born,
a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom
O sprinkle me with hyssop, then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervour sustain me,
That I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth shall declare Your praise.

74

Morning Prayers

For in sacrifice You take no delight,
burnt offering from me You would refuse,
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion:
Rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
(burnt offerings wholly consumed),
then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
Glory: now and ever:
[The Symbol of Faith]
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator of
heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, the only-begotten, born
of the Father before all ages. Light from light, true God from
true God, begotten, not made, one in essence with the Father;
through Whom all things were made. For us men and for our
salvation, He came down from heaven, and was incarnate from
the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man. He was
crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was
buried. He rose on the third day according to the scriptures.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; and He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. And in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of Life, Who proceeds from the
Father. Together with the Father and the Son He is worshiped
and glorified; He spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I profess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead and the
life of the world to come. Amen.
75

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then,

The First Prayer

[by Saint Macarius]
O God, cleanse me, a sinner, for I have done but little
good before You. Deliver me from evil, and may Your will
be done in me so that I may open my lips without blame and
praise Your holy Name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever. Amen.

The Second Prayer
[by Saint Macarius]

Awakening from sleep, I offer You, O Savior, a midnight
hymn. Bowing before You, I exclaim: Do not allow me to die
in sin. Instead, O Lord, Who was willingly crucified, have
mercy on me. O Christ our God, raise me up, strengthen me in
prayer and perseverance, and, after the night’s sleep, grant me
a day without sin and save me. Amen.

The Third Prayer
[by Saint Macarius]

Awakening from sleep I hasten to You, O Master and
Lover of Mankind. As I, through Your mercy, begin to fulfill
my duties to You, I beseech You: aid me every minute and in
every deed. Deliver me from every worldly, evil thing and
every impulse of the devil and save me and lead me to Your
eternal kingdom. You are my Creator and the Giver of every
blessing. In You I trust, and to You I give praise, now and ever
and forever. Amen.

76

Morning Prayers

The Fourth Prayer
[by Saint Macarius]

O Lord, in Your manifold goodness and great compassion,
You have granted that I, Your servant, pass the preceding
hours of this night free from the attack of the evil one. O
Master and Creator of all things, grant that by Your true light,
I may do Your will with an enlightened heart, now and ever
and forever. Amen.

The Fifth Prayer
O Lord God almighty, You receive from Your heavenly
powers the thrice-holy hymn. Receive from me, Your
undeserving servant, this nocturnal hymn. Grant that all the
years of my life, and at every hour, I may give glory to You,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Sixth Prayer

[by Saint Basil the Great]
O Lord almighty, God of powers and of all flesh, You
dwell on high but watch over the humble; You search the
heart and the innermost being of humans and clearly perceive
their secrets. O Eternal and ever-existent Light, in You there
is no change nor even a shadow of change. O Immortal King,
accept our prayers which at this present moment depend upon
the multitude of Your mercies and which we offer to You from
defiled lips. Forgive our transgressions committed in word,
deed, or thought, committed with knowledge or through
thoughtlessness. Cleanse us from every kind of defilement of
body and soul; and grant that we approach all the nights of
this present life with a watchful heart and sound judgment,
awaiting the glorious coming and day of revelation of Your
77

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

only-begotten Son, our Lord, God, and Savior, Jesus Christ,
Who will come with glory as Judge of all, granting to everyone
according to their works. Let us not fall and become slothful,
but rather on guard and ready for action. Let us turn from our
former ways and be ready to joyfully accompany Him into the
divine inner-chamber, where the sound of festive voices never
ceases, and where there is indescribable delight in those who
behold the inexpressible goodness of Your countenance. For
You are the true Light that enlightens and sanctifies all things;
and all creation praises You forever and ever. Amen.

The Seventh Prayer

[by Saint Basil the Great]
We bless You, O Most High God and Lord of mercy, for
You always do great and inscrutable things for us which are
both glorious and over-abundant. You provide us with sleep as
a rest for our infirmities and as a relief for the burdens of our
bodies tired by labor. We thank You that You did not destroy
us in our transgressions. As usual You loved as a Lover of
Mankind, and raised us up who were lying in despair so that
we might praise Your majesty. Therefore, we entreat Your
immeasurable goodness: enlighten our thoughts and eyes;
raise up our minds from the deep sleep of slothfulness; open
our mouths and fill them with praise so that everywhere and
without distraction we may be able to glorify and profess You,
O God, praised by all people and things: the eternal Father,
together with Your only-begotten Son, and Your most holy,
good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

78

Morning Prayers

The Eighth Prayer

[attributed to Saint John Chrysostom,
this prayer has twenty-four petitions,
one for each hour of the day]
O Lord, do not deprive me of Your heavenly riches.
O Lord, deliver me from eternal torments.
O Lord, if I have sinned by mind, thought, word, or deed,
forgive me.
O Lord, deliver me from every type of ignorance,
forgetfulness, apathy, and faintheartedness.
O Lord, deliver me from every type of temptation.
O Lord, enlighten my heart, which sinful desires cloud.
O Lord, I as a human have sinned. You as a gracious God
see the weakness of my soul and have mercy on me.
O Lord, send Your grace to me as a help so that I may
glorify Your holy Name.
O Lord Jesus Christ, inscribe me in the book of life and
grant to me a good end.
O Lord, my God, even though I have done nothing good
before You, grant that I may lay down a worthy beginning
according to Your goodness.
O Lord, sprinkle in my heart the dew of Your grace.
O Lord of heaven and earth, remember me, Your sinful
servant, in Your kingdom. Amen.
O Lord, receive me in repentance.
O Lord, do not forsake me.
O Lord, do not lead me into misfortune.
O Lord, give me good thoughts.
O Lord, give me tears and a remembrance of death.
O Lord, give me the thought of confessing my sins.
O Lord, give me humility, purity, and obedience.
O Lord, give me suffering, generosity, and meekness.
79

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Lord, implant in my heart the root of all good and the
fear of You.
O Lord, enable me to love You with my whole heart and
mind and to do Your will in all things.
O Lord, protect me from unjust people, demons, sufferings,
and from every other evil.
O Lord, You are known in Your work and in Your will; let
Your will be done in me, a sinner, for You are blessed forever.
Amen.

The Ninth Prayer
O my most compassionate and most merciful God, Lord
Jesus Christ, because of Your great love You descended and
became incarnate so that You might save all. Again, O Savior,
I beseech You, save me by Your grace. If You save me by
deeds this is nothing but grace and a gift; it is nothing but a
greater debt.
You are mighty in generosity and indescribable in mercy.
O Christ, You have said, “Whoever believes in me shall have
life and shall never see death.” Therefore, if faith in You saves
those who are in despair, then save me because of my faith in
You, for You are my God and my Creator. O my God, let my
faith suffice in place of my deeds, for You will find that my
deeds do not justify me at all. Let my faith enable me to be a
participator in Your eternal glory.
Do not permit Satan to overpower me and boast that he
has snatched me from Your hand and protection, O Word. Save
me, O Christ my Savior, whether I wish it or not; hasten to me
or I perish quickly. You are my God from the time that I was
conceived. Now, O Lord, enable me to love You just as I once
loved sin itself. May I again serve You diligently and without
slothfulness, just as I once served Satan. Most of all, I will
80

Morning Prayers

serve You, my Lord and my God, Jesus Christ, throughout all
the days of my life, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Tenth Prayer

[Prayer to my Guardian Angel by
Saint Peter the Studite]
O Holy Angel of Christ: in homage I come to you, my holy
guardian who, since my baptism, have been assigned to me
to protect my sinful body and soul. I beseech your powerful
intercession. I have often offended you by my indolence and
bad habits. You are most pure in your radiance, and I have
often driven you away by my dishonorable acts: lies, slander,
jealousies, rash judgment, haughtiness, pride, uncharitable
behavior, malice, greed, miserliness, impurity, hate, gluttony
in food and drink, evil and wicked thoughts, indolent habits
and evil tendencies, possessing in myself all desire for carnal
lust. O my holy guardian, how can you look on me? With
what eyes do you see me entangled in evil vices? So how can
I expect forgiveness of my evil and repulsive deeds into which
I fall repeatedly every day and night? But prostrating myself
before you, my holy guardian, I beseech you, be merciful to
me, your sinful and unworthy servant. Be my defender and
aid me against my enemies through your holy intercession;
and make me worthy to be a partaker of the kingdom of God
with all the saints, forever and ever. Amen.

The Eleventh Prayer

[Prayer to the Theotokos by Saint Peter the Studite]
O my most holy Lady and Theotokos, by your holy and
all-powerful prayers, drive away from me, your humble
and wretched servant, discouragement, forgetfulness,
misunderstanding, carelessness; drive away all impure,
81

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

wicked, and blasphemous thoughts from my bruised heart and
clouded mind. Quench the flame of my passions because I
am miserable and wretched. Save me from my numerous and
evil thoughts and deeds; guard me from every wicked act, for
you are blessed by all nations, and your honorable name is
glorified, forever and ever. Amen.

Midnight Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos
I sing of your grace, O Lady, and I pray you to grace my
mind. Teach me to walk aright in the way of the commandments
of Christ. Strengthen me to keep awake in song and drive
away the sleep of despondency. O Bride of God, by your
prayers release me, bound with the bonds of sin. Guard me
night and day, and deliver me from the foes that defeat me. O
bearer of God the Life-giver, enliven me who am deadened
by passions. O bearer of the Unwaning Light, enlighten my
blinded soul. O marvelous palace of the Master, make me to
be a house of the divine Spirit. O bearer of the Healer, heal
the perennial passions of my soul. Guide me to the path of
repentance, for I am tossed in the storm of life. Deliver me
from eternal fire and from evil worms and from Tartarus. Do
not let me be exposed to the rejoicing of demons, guilty as I
am of many sins. Renew me, grown old from senseless sins,
O most pure one. Present me, untouched by all torments, and
pray for me to the Master of all. Deem me worthy to find the
joys of heaven with all the saints. O most holy Virgin, hear
the voice of your unprofitable servant. Grant me torrents of
tears, O most pure one, to cleanse my soul from impurity. I
offer the groans of my heart to you unceasingly; strive for me,
O Lady. Accept my service of supplication and offer it to the
compassionate God. You who are above the angels, raise me
82

Morning Prayers

above the confusion of the world. O Light-bearing heavenly
tabernacle, direct the grace of the Spirit in me. I raise my
hands and lips in your praise, defiled as they are by impurity,
O all pure one. Deliver me from soul-corrupting evils, and
fervently intercede with Christ, to Whom is due honor and
worship, now and ever and forever. Amen.
Then It is truly proper: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have
mercy. Three times. Give the blessing.
And the dismissal:
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us,
through the prayers of His most pure Mother, of our venerable
and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, for Christ is
good and loves mankind.

83

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

84

THE ORDER OF MATINS
WEEKDAY AND LENTEN MATINS
[The Royal Service]
If it is the Great Forty Day Fast, after Blessed is our God:
say: Trisagion. Most holy Trinity: After Our Father: Lord,
have mercy 12. Glory: now and ever: Come, let us worship:
three times, and the two psalms.
But if it is not, after the blessing:
Come, let us worship: three times, and the psalms.

Psalm 19
May the Lord answer in time of trial;
May the name of Jacob’s God protect you.
May He send you help from His shrine
and give you support from Zion.
May He remember all your offerings
and receive your sacrifice with favor.
May He give you your heart’s desire
and fulfill every one of your plans.
May we ring out with joy at your victory
And rejoice in the name of our God.
85

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

May the Lord grant all our prayers.
I am sure now that the Lord
will give victory to His anointed,
will reply from His holy heaven
with the mighty victory of His hand.
Some trust in chariots or horses,
but we in the name of the Lord.
They will collapse and fall,
but we shall hold and stand firm.
Give victory to the king, O Lord,
give answer on the day we call.

Psalm 20
O Lord, Your strength gives joy to the king;
How Your saving help makes him glad!
You have granted him his heart’s desire;
You have not refused the prayer of his lips.
You came to meet him with the blessings of success,
You have set on his head a crown of pure gold.
He asked You for life and this You have given,
days that will last from age to age.
Your saving help has given him glory.
You have laid upon him majesty and splendor.
You have granted Your blessings to him for ever.
You have made him rejoice with the joy of Your presence.
The king has put his trust in the Lord;
through the mercy of the Most High he shall stand firm.
86

Weekday and Lenten Matins

His hand will seek and find all his foes,
his right hand find out those that hate him.
You will burn them like a blazing furnace
on the day when You appear.
And the Lord shall destroy them in His anger;
fire will swallow them up.
You will wipe out their race from the earth
and their children from the sons of men.
Though they plan evil against You,
though they plot, they shall not prevail.
For You will force them to retreat;
at them You will aim with Your bow.
O Lord, arise in Your strength;
we shall sing and praise Your power.
Glory: now and ever: Trisagion. Most holy Trinity: Our
Father: For Thine is the kingdom:
And these troparia:
Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.
Grant victory to Your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Glory:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.
87

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
O awesome intercession that cannot be put to shame, O
good one, despise not our prayers, O all-hymned Theotokos;
strengthen the people of the true faith; save the well-believing
kings that You have appointed to rule; and grant them victory
from heaven; for you gave birth to God, O only-blessed one.
The priest:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 6.
Again we pray for our God-protected King and for the
armed forces.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 6.
Exclamation:
For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory
to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
[Nocturnal Vigil]
And immediately say:
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
Priest:
Glory to the Holy Trinity, one in essence, and life-creating,
and undivided, always, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
88

Weekday and Lenten Matins

And we begin the Six Psalms, with each one listening in
silence and contrition.
And the brother, who reads with reverence, and fear of
God, says:
Glory to God in the highest, and to His people on earth,
His peace and good will. Three times.
O Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will declare Your
praise. Twice.

Psalm 3
How many are my foes, O Lord!
How many are rising up against me!
How many are saying about me:
There is no help for him in God.
But You, Lord, are a shield about me,
my glory, Who lift up my head.
I cry aloud to the Lord.
He answers from His holy mountain.
I lie down to rest and I sleep.
I wake, for the Lord upholds me.
I will not fear even thousands of people
who are ranged on every side against me.
Arise, Lord; save me, my God,
You Who strike all my foes on the mouth,
You Who break the teeth of the wicked!
O Lord of salvation, bless Your people!
I lie down to rest and I sleep.
I wake for the Lord upholds me.
89

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 37
O Lord, do not rebuke me in Your anger;
do not punish me, Lord, in Your rage.
Your arrows have sunk deep in me;
Your hand has come down upon me.
Through Your anger all my body is sick;
through my sin, there is no health in my limbs.
My guilt towers higher than my head;
it is a weight too heavy to bear.
My wounds are foul and festering,
the result of my own folly.
I am bowed and brought to my knees.
I go mourning all the day long.
All my frame burns with fever;
all my body is sick.
Spent and utterly crushed,
I cry aloud in anguish of heart.
O Lord, You know all my longing;
my groans are not hidden from You.
My heart throbs, my strength is spent;
the very light has gone from my eyes.
My friends avoid me like a leper;
those closest to me stand afar off.
Those who plot against my life lay snares;
those who seek my ruin speak of harm,
planning treachery all the day long.
But I am like the deaf who cannot hear,
like the dumb unable to speak.
90

Weekday and Lenten Matins

I am like a man who hears nothing
in whose mouth is no defense.
I count on You, O Lord;
it is You, Lord God, Who will answer.
I pray: ‘Do not let them mock me,
those who triumph if my foot should slip.’
For I am on the point of falling
and my pain is always before me.
I confess that I am guilty
and my sin fills me with dismay.
My wanton enemies are numberless
and my lying foes are many.
They repay me evil for good
and attack me for seeking what is right.
O Lord, do not forsake me!
My God, do not stay afar off!
Make haste and come to my help,
O Lord, my God, my Savior!
O Lord, do not forsake me!
My God, do not stay afar off!
Make haste and come to my help,
O Lord, my God, my Savior!

Psalm 62
O God, You are my God, for You I long;
for You my soul is thirsting.
My body pines for You
91

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

like a dry, weary land without water.
So I gaze on You in the sanctuary
to see Your strength and Your glory.
For Your love is better than life;
my lips will speak Your praise.
So I will bless You all my life;
in Your name I will lift up my hands.
My soul shall be filled as with a banquet;
my mouth shall praise You with joy.
On my bed I remember You.
On You I muse through the night
for You have been my help;
in the shadow of Your wings I rejoice.
My soul clings to You;
Your right hand holds me fast.
Those who seek to destroy my life
shall go down to the depths of the earth.
They shall be put into the power of the sword
and left as the prey of the jackals.
But the king shall rejoice in God;
(all that swear by Him shall be blessed)
for the mouth of liars shall be silenced.
On You I muse through the night
for You have been my help;
in the shadow of Your wings I rejoice.
My soul clings to You;
Your right hand holds me fast.
92

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times, without bows.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
But the priest says quietly the prayers of Matins, standing,
with head uncovered, before the holy doors.

Psalm 87
Lord my God, I call for help by day;
I cry at night before You.
Let my prayer come into Your presence.
O turn Your ear to my cry
For my soul is filled with evils;
my life is on the brink of the grave.
I am reckoned as one in the tomb;
I have reached the end of my strength,
like one alone among the dead,
like the slain lying in their graves,
like those You remember no more,
cut off, as they are, from Your hand.
You have laid me in the depths of the tomb,
in places that are dark, in the depths.
Your anger weighs down upon me:
I am drowned beneath Your waves.
93

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You have taken away my friends
and made me hateful in their sight.
Imprisoned, I cannot escape;
my eyes are sunken with grief.
I call to You, Lord, all the day long;
to You I stretch out my hands.
Will You work wonders for the dead?
Will the shades stand and praise You?
Will Your love be told in the grave
or Your faithfulness among the dead?
Will Your wonders be known in the dark
or Your justice in the land of oblivion?
As for me, Lord, I call to You for help:
in the morning my prayer comes before You.
Lord, why do You reject me?
Why do You hide Your face?
Wretched, close to death from my youth,
I have borne Your trials, I am numb.
Your fury has swept down upon me;
Your terrors have utterly destroyed me.
They surround me all the day like a flood,
they assail me all together.
Friend and neighbor You have taken away:
my one companion is darkness.
Lord my God, I call for help by day;
I cry at night before You.
Let my prayer come into Your presence.
O turn Your ear to my cry.
94

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Psalm 102
Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and all my being bless His holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all His blessings.
It is He Who forgives all your guilt
Who heals every one of your ills,
Who redeems your life from the grave,
Who crowns you with love and compassion,
Who fills your life with good things
renewing your youth like an eagle’s.
The Lord secures justice
and the rights of all the oppressed.
He made known His ways to Moses,
and His deeds to Israel’s sons.
The Lord is compassion and love,
slow to anger and rich in mercy.
His wrath will come to an end;
He will not be angry for ever.
He does not treat us according to our sins
nor repay us according to our faults.
For as the heavens are high above the earth,
so strong is His love for those who fear Him.
As far as the east is from the west,
so far does He remove our sins.
As a father has compassion on his sons,
the Lord has pity on those who fear Him.
For He knows of what we are made,
95

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

He remembers that we are dust.
As for man, his days are like grass;
he flowers like the flower of the field;
the wind blows and he is gone
and his place never sees him again.
But the kindness of the Lord is everlasting
upon those who hold Him in fear;
His justice reaches out to children’s children
when they keep His covenant in truth,
when they remember His commands and do them.
The Lord has set His throne in heaven,
and His kingdom is ruling over all.
Bless the Lord, all His angels,
mighty in power, fulfilling His word,
who heed the voice of His word.
Bless the Lord, all His hosts,
His servants, who do His will.
Bless the Lord, all His works,
in every place where He rules.
Bless the Lord, O my soul.
Bless the Lord, all His works,
in every place where He rules.
Bless the Lord, O my soul!

Psalm 142
Lord, listen to my prayer:
turn Your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, You are just; give answer.
96

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Do not call Your servant to judgment.
For no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;
he has crushed my life to the ground;
he has made me dwell in darkness
like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;
my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past;
I ponder all Your works.
I muse on what Your hand has wrought
and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You.
Lord, make haste and answer;
for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face
lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love
for I put my trust in You.
Make me know the way I should walk;
to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;
I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will
for You, O Lord, are my God.
Let Your good spirit guide me
in ways that are level and smooth.
97

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;
in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;
destroy all those who oppress me
for I am Your servant, O Lord.
Lord, listen to my prayer:
in Your justice, do not call Your servant to judgment.
Lord, listen to my prayer:
in Your justice, do not call Your servant to judgment.
Let Your good spirit guide me
in ways that are level and smooth.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
While the Six Psalms are being read, the priest says these
prayers:

The First Prayer
We thank You, Lord our God, for You have raised us up
from our beds, and have filled our mouths with a word of
praise that we might worship You and call upon Your holy
Name, and we beseech You by Your compassion with which
You have always treated our life: also now send help to those
who stand before the countenance of Your holy glory and
await Your rich mercy; and grant, that with fear and love, they
may always offer worship, to praise Your ineffable goodness.
For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor, and worship, now and ever and forever. Amen.
98

Weekday and Lenten Matins

The Second Prayer
From the night our spirit rises early unto You, our God,
for Your commandments are a light upon the earth. Give us
understanding that we may be perfected in righteousness and
holiness in fear of You, for it is You Whom we glorify as our
true God. Incline Your ear and hear us, O Lord, and remember
all present and praying with us by name, and save them by
Your might. Bless Your people and sanctify Your inheritance.
Give peace to Your world, to Your churches, to the priests,
to the government (or to our God-protected king), and to all
Your people.
For blessed and glorified is Your all-honored and sublime
Name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Amen.

The Third Prayer
From the night our spirit rises early to You, O God,
for Your commandments are light. Teach us, O God, Your
righteousness, Your commandments, and Your statutes.
Enlighten the eyes of our understanding so that we never fall
asleep in sins unto death. Drive out all gloomy darkness from
our hearts. Give us the Sun of Justice, and by the seal of Your
Holy Spirit preserve our life unassailed. Direct our steps in the
way of peace. Grant us to see the dawn and the day in joy that
we may send up our morning prayers to You.
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever. Amen.

99

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Fourth Prayer
O Master God, holy and beyond understanding, Who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, Who have given
us rest in the sleep of night and have raised us up for the
glorification and supplication of Your goodness, we entreat
You of Your own tender compassion; also accept us who
now worship You and give thanks to You as much as it is in
our power, and grant us all our petitions which are for our
salvation. Show us to be sons of light and of the day and
heirs of Your eternal good gifts. Remember, O Lord, in the
multitude of Your mercies all Your people, both those who
are praying with us as well as all our brethren on land, at
sea, [in the air,] and in every place of Your dominion who are
in need of Your love for mankind and help; and grant Your
great mercy to all so that, being preserved in safety in soul and
body, with confidence we may give glory to Your wondrous
and blessed Name.
For You are a merciful, gracious God and You love
mankind, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Fifth Prayer
Treasury of Blessings, Ever-flowing Fountain, Holy
Father, Wonderworker, All-powerful and Almighty One, we
all worship You and pray to You, imploring Your mercies and
compassions to help and protect our lowliness. Remember,
O Lord, Your servants. Receive the morning prayers of us all
like incense before You, and let none of us be found unfit,
but encompass us all with Your mercies. Remember, O Lord,
those who keep vigil and sing of Your glory, and of Your onlybegotten Son and our God, and of Your Holy Spirit. Be their
Helper and Defender. Accept their supplications upon Your
100

Weekday and Lenten Matins

heavenly and spiritual altar.
For You are our God, and to You we give glory, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever. Amen.

The Sixth Prayer
We give thanks to You, Lord God of our salvation, for You
do all things for the well-being of our life that we may always
look to You, the Savior and Benefactor of our souls; for You
have given us rest in that time of the night that has passed
and have raised us up from our beds and appointed us in the
worship of Your honorable Name. Therefore, we pray You, O
Lord, give us grace and power that we may be made worthy
to sing to You with understanding and to pray unceasingly in
fear and trembling, working out our salvation with the help
of Your Christ. Remember also, O Lord, those who cry out to
You in the night. Hear them and have mercy, and crush under
their feet invisible and hostile enemies.
For You are the King of peace, and the Savior of our souls,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever. Amen.

The Seventh Prayer
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who have
raised us from our beds and gathered us at this hour of prayer,
give us grace in the opening of our mouths and receive our
thanksgivings according to the ability of our power, and teach
us Your statutes. For we do not know how to pray as we
ought, unless You, O Lord, instruct us by Your Holy Spirit.
Therefore, we pray to You: remit, pardon, forgive if we have
sinned in any way unto this very hour by word or deed or
thought, voluntarily or involuntarily; for if You, O Lord,
101

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

should mark our guilt, Lord, who would survive? But with
You is found redemption. You alone are holy, the powerful
Helper, Defender of our life, and our songs are always of You.
May the might of Your kingdom be blessed and glorified,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Eighth Prayer
Lord our God, Who have banished from us the slothfulness
of sleep, and have summoned us together by a holy calling
to lift up our hands also in the night and confess to You
the righteousness of Your judgments: Receive our prayers,
petitions, confessions, and nocturnal worship; and grant us, O
God, a faith unashamed, confident hope, and a love without
pretense. Bless our comings and goings, our deeds, works,
words, thoughts; and grant us to come to the beginning of
the day, praising, singing, and blessing the greatness of Your
ineffable power.
For blessed is Your all-holy Name, and glorified is Your
kingdom, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and
forever. Amen.

The Ninth Prayer
Lord our God, Who have given mankind remission of
sins through repentance, and have shown us the repentance
of the prophet David that led to pardon as a model of
acknowledgement and confession of sins: You, Yourself, O
Master, according to Your great mercy have mercy on us who
have fallen into so many and so great offenses, and in Your
compassion blot out our offenses. For against You have we
sinned, O Lord, Who know both the hidden and secret things
of the human heart, and Who alone have power to forgive
sins. A pure heart You have created in us and have established
102

Weekday and Lenten Matins

us with Your guiding Spirit, and have shown us the joy of
Your salvation; do not cast us from Your face. But, as You are
good and love mankind, be well-pleased that we may offer
to You a sacrifice of righteousness and oblation on Your holy
altars even until our last breath.
Through the mercy and compassion and loving-kindness
of Your only-begotten Son with Whom You are blessed,
together with Your all-holy and good and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Tenth Prayer
O God, our God, Who by Your will have brought into
being the spiritual and rational Powers, we pray You and
we implore You: Receive our hymns of glorification which
together with all Your creatures we offer according to our
strength, and grant us in return the rich gifts of Your lovingkindness. For to You bows every knee in heaven and on earth
and in the infernal regions, and everything that has breath and
all creation sings Your incomprehensible glory. For You alone
are the true and most-merciful God.
For all the heavenly Powers praise You, and we give glory
to You, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Eleventh Prayer
We praise You, we sing to You, we bless You, and we
give thanks to You, God of our fathers, for You have brought
us through the shades of night and have shown us again the
light of day. But we pray Your loving goodness: cleanse our
sins, and accept our prayer in Your great tender goodness,
for we flee to Your refuge, O merciful and all-powerful God.
Make the true Sun of Justice shine in our hearts, enlighten
103

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

our mind, and guard all our senses, so that walking nobly in
the way of Your commandments as in the day, we may attain
to life eternal, for with You is the fountain of life, and may
we be deemed worthy to come to the enjoyment of Your
unapproachable light.
For You are our God, and to You we give glory, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever. Amen.
Then, the Great Ektenia:
In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
After each of the following petitions, the choir sings:
Lord, have mercy.
For peace from on high, and for the salvation of our souls,
let us pray to the Lord.
For peace in the whole world, for the stability of the holy
Churches of God and for the union of all, let us pray to the
Lord.
For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith,
reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.
For our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome, let us pray to
the Lord.
For our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for the venerable
presbyterate, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the
people, let us pray to the Lord.
104

Weekday and Lenten Matins

For our government (or for our God-protected Emperor
or King Name) and for all in the service of our country, let us
pray to the Lord.
For this city (or for this village, or for this holy monastery),
for every city, community, and for the faithful living in them,
let us pray to the Lord.
For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of
the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.
For those who travel by sea, air, and land, for the sick,
the suffering, the captive, and for their salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.
That we be delivered from all affliction, wrath and need,
let us pray to the Lord.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
Exclamation:
For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor, and worship, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
105

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And immediately the following is sung in the tone of the
troparion of the day:
[Psalm 117]
The Lord is God and has revealed Himself to us; blessed
is He Who comes in the Name of the Lord.
Verse 1: Give thanks to the Lord for He is good; for His
love endures forever.
Verse 2: They encircled me, compassed me about; in the
Lord’s Name I crushed them.
Verse 3: I shall not die, I shall live and recount the deeds
of the Lord.
Verse 4: The stone which the builders rejected has become
the cornerstone. This is the work of the Lord, a marvel in our
eyes.
Then we say the appointed troparion twice and the
theotokion in the same tone. If two troparia are appointed, the
first is always said twice, then the second and the theotokion
are said.
_________________________________________________
If, however, it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung,] or
the Great Forty Day Fast, instead of The Lord is God we sing
Alleluia three times according to the tone of the octoechos.
And these verses are said:

106

Weekday and Lenten Matins

[Isaiah 26]
Verse 1: My spirit yearns for You in the night; yes, my
spirit within me keeps vigil for You.
Verse 2: When Your judgment dawns upon the earth, the
world’s inhabitants learn justice.
Verse 3: Let them be shamed when they see Your zeal for
Your people; let the fire prepared for Your enemies consume
them.
Verse 4: You have increased the nation, O Lord, increased
the nation to Your own glory.
And after Alleluia, the Trinitarian Hymns of the tone,
each one said once.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 1:
Through bodily forms, we have come to the spiritual and
immaterial understanding of the bodiless powers, and by the
singing of the thrice-holy hymn, we have received the light of
the Divinity in three Persons. Let us sing with the cherubim to
our only God: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God:
Glory:
With all the powers of heaven let us sing as the cherubim,
and offer the thrice-holy hymn of praise to the Most High:
Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God, through the prayers of
all Your saints, have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
Awakening from sleep we worship You, O blessed One,
and offer the angelic hymn to You, O powerful One: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God, through the prayers of the Theotokos,
have mercy on us.
107

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

It should be known how to say the endings for all the first
Trinitarian Hymns of the eight tones:
On Monday to say this:
Through the protection of Your incorporeal powers have
mercy on us.
On Tuesday:
us.

Through the prayers of Your Forerunner, have mercy on
On Wednesday and also on Friday:
Through the power of Your holy cross, protect us.
On Thursday:

Through the prayers of Your holy apostles and bishop
Nicholas, have mercy on us.
As to the other two Trinitarian Hymns, they are said
according to their endings as written.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 2:
O uncreated Nature and Creator of all, open our mouths
so that we may proclaim Your praise by singing: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of Your apostles,
prophets, and martyrs have mercy on us.
Glory:
On earth we imitate the Powers on high, and we offer our
hymn of victory to You, O Gracious One, singing: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your saints
have mercy on us.
108

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Now and ever:
O Lord, You have lifted me up from my bed and from
sleep, now enlighten my mind, open my heart and my lips that
I may sing to You, Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O
God! Through the prayers of the Theotokos, have mercy on
us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 3:
O Trinity one in essence and undivided, unity in Three
Hypostases and equal in eternity, with the angels we sing a
hymn to You as God: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God:
Glory:
Eternal Father, co-eternal Son and the Spirit Who shares
eternity with the One God, we dare to glorify You with the
hymn offered by the cherubim: Holy, holy, holy are You, O
God. Through the prayers of all Your saints, have mercy on
us.
Now and ever:
The Judge shall come suddenly and the deeds of all shall
be brought to light. In fear we cry out at midnight: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God! Through the prayers of the Theotokos,
have mercy on us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 4:
We dare to glorify You, Christ God, with Your eternal
Father, and Your most Holy Spirit, with the cherubim, saying:
Holy, holy, holy are You, O God:

109

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
As the orders of angels in heaven, with fear we mortals
on earth offer You this hymn of victory, O Blessed One: Holy,
holy, holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your
saints, have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
We mortals now dare to sing and offer to You the hymn
of Your heavenly ministers: holy, holy, holy are You, O God.
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 5:
This is the time for praise and the hour of prayer; let us
unceasingly cry to the Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God:
Glory:
With unworthy lips we dare to represent the heavenly
hosts and sing to You, O eternal Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are
You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your saints, have
mercy on us.
Now and ever:
O Christ, You dwelt in the virginal womb without being
separated from the bosom of the Father; accept our praise
with the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God. Through the
prayers of the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 6:
The six-winged powers with immaterial lips sing the
thrice-holy hymn with unceasing voice to You, our God, and
110

Weekday and Lenten Matins

we on earth with unworthy lips render praise to You: Holy,
holy, holy are You, O God:
Glory:
Before You stand the cherubim with fear and the seraphim
trembling in awe, offering the thrice-holy hymn with unceasing
voices, and we sinners also cry out with them: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your saints,
have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
Let us glorify the three Persons in one God, united without
confusion, and let us take up the hymn of the angels as we
sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of
the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 7:
To the unapproachable Divinity and the unique Trinity, let
us offer the thrice-holy praise of the seraphim, and with fear
let us sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God:
Glory:
Shaking off both laziness and sleep, arise and offer praise
to the Creator, and in fear, O soul, sing to Him: Holy, holy,
holy are You, O God. Through the prayers of all Your saints,
have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
Your great glory is praised by the cherubim, O Lord, and
the angels adore Your divine majesty; accept from our sinful
lips as we praise You on earth: Holy, holy, holy are You, O
111

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

God. Through the prayers of the Theotokos, have mercy on
us.

Trinitarian Hymns, Tone 8:
Lifting our hearts to heaven, let us imitate the heavenly
orders, and let us fall down with fear before the Judge, as we
sing the hymn of victory and say: Holy, holy, holy are You, O
God:
Glory:
The cherubim dare not raise their eyes to You as they
joyfully sing the divine words of the thrice-holy hymn; and
we also cry out with them: Holy, holy, holy are You, O God.
Through the prayers of all Your saints, have mercy on us.
Now and ever:
Overwhelmed by the weight of our many sins, we dare
not raise our eyes to heaven; with souls and bodies bowed
before You, we sing together with the angels: Holy, holy, holy
are You, O God. Through the prayers of the Theotokos, have
mercy on us.
_________________________________________________
Then the stichologia of the Psalter.
At weekday Matins the ektenias after the kathismata are
not said except on Saturday, saints with the Great Doxology,
pre-festive and post-festive days.
But after the completion of the first stichologion, the
deacon or the priest does the petitions of the Little Ektenia:
112

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Again and again let us pray to the Lord in peace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
Exclamation:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the Sessional Hymn according to the
order.
After the Second Stichologion: Again and again: and the
rest.
Exclamation:
For You, O God, are good and You love mankind, and to
You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the Sessional Hymn according to the
order.

113

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

_________________________________________________
From Pascha to the Leave-taking,
after the Stichologia we say:
Having beheld the resurrection of Christ let us worship the
holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross,
O Christ, and we glorify and praise Your holy Resurrection.
You are our God, and besides You we recognize no other,
and we call upon Your Name. Come, all you faithful, and let
us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ since, through the
cross, joy has come to all the world. Ever blessing the Lord,
let us extol His Resurrection since He, having suffered the
crucifixion, has destroyed Death by His death.
_________________________________________________
[Morning Praise]
After this, Psalm 50:

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.
My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge
O see, in guilt I was born,
a sinner was I conceived.
114

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom
O sprinkle me with hyssop then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervour sustain me,
That I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,
burnt offering from me You would refuse,
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion:
Rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
115

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

(burnt offerings wholly consumed),
then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
_________________________________________________
Then, if it is the holy and great Forty Day Fast, except
Saturdays and Thursday of the Great Canon, the deacon, or
the priest, says this prayer:
Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance.
Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the
Christian people of the true faith and send down upon us Your
abundant mercy. Through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of the
precious and life-creating cross; through the protection of the
honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the honorable,
glorious, Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John; of the holy,
glorious, and praiseworthy apostles; (or of the holy apostle
and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles;) and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra in Lycia; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-tothe-apostles, teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing
great prince Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy
priest-martyr Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony
and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our
venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous
ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose
church it is), Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate; and
of all the saints; we pray You, O most merciful Lord, hear us
sinners praying to You, and have mercy on us.
116

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
The priest exclaims:
Through the mercy and compassion and loving-kindness
of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed,
together with Your most-holy and good and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
_________________________________________________
And we begin the scriptural canticles and the canons.
After the Third Ode, the priest says the Little Ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. Then, the Sessional Hymn.
After the Sixth Ode, the ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For You are the King of peace and the Savior of our souls,
and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
117

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Choir: Amen.
The kontakion and the ikos and the reading from the
synaxarion.
After the completion of the katavasia of the Eighth Ode,
the deacon or the priest exclaims:
Let us greatly extol the Theotokos and the Mother of
Light in hymns!

The Canticle of the Theotokos
from the Holy Gospel according to Luke
The ancient verse: We extol the Theotokos in hymns!
My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in
God, my Savior.
And after each of the following sing the verse: More
honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to God
the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Because He has regarded the humility of His handmaid,
for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed, sing the verse.
Because He Who is mighty has done great things for me,
and holy is His Name, and His love is from generation to
generation to those who fear Him, sing the verse.
118

Weekday and Lenten Matins

He has shown might with His arm; He has scattered the
proud in the conceit of their heart, sing the verse.
He has put down the mighty from their seat and has
exalted the humble; He has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich He has sent away empty, sing the verse.
He has received Israel, His servant, being mindful of His
love, as He spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and to his seed
forever, sing the verse.
After the Ninth Ode:
It is truly proper to glorify you, O Theotokos, the everblessed, immaculate, and the mother of our God. More
honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to God
the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
But if it is a prefestive or a postfestive It is truly proper: is
not sung, but immediately the ektenia.
After the Ninth Ode, the ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For all the heavenly Powers praise You, and we give glory
to You, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

119

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

_________________________________________________

HYMNS OF LIGHT
If it is the Forty Day Fast, the Hymns of Light are said
three times according to the appointed tone.
This is said at the conclusion of the Hymns of Light:
On Monday, to the first repetition:
Through the protection of Your incorporeal powers, and
save me.
On Tuesday:
Through the prayers of Your Forerunner, O Lord, and
save me.
On Wednesday and on Friday:
Through the power of Your cross, O Lord, and save me.
On Thursday:
Through the prayers of Your holy apostles and holy
Bishop Nicholas, and save me.
The second, at Glory: at the ending always say:
Through the prayers of all Your saints, and save me.
And the third, at Now and ever: at the ending say:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, and save me.
120

Weekday and Lenten Matins

And in the Sixth Tone, at the beginning of the Hymn of Light,
instead of:
Through the protection of Your incorporeal powers:
If it is Tuesday, this is said:
Through the prayers of Your Forerunner, O Lord: and the
rest of the Hymn is said to the conclusion.
And on Wednesday and on Friday, instead of:
Through the protection of Your incorporeal powers: at the
beginning this is said:
Through the power of Your cross, O Lord, send forth Your
eternal light to our souls.
And on Thursday, this:
Through the prayers of Your holy apostles and holy
Bishop Nicholas, O Lord, send forth Your eternal light to our
souls.
At the second, at Glory: this is said at the beginning of the
Hymn of Light:
Through the prayers of all Your saints, O Lord, send forth
Your eternal light to our souls.
At the third, at Now and ever: this is said at the beginning
of the Hymn of Light:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Lord, send forth
Your eternal light to our souls.
121

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Tone 1
Send light, O Lord, to purify my soul from all sin, (through
the protection of the incorporeal powers), and save me.

Tone 2
Send forth Your eternal light, O Christ God, and mystically
enlighten the eyes of my heart, (through the protection of the
incorporeal powers), and save me.

Tone 3
Send forth Your light, O Christ God, and enlighten my
heart, (through the protection of the incorporeal powers), and
save me.

Tone 4
Send light on Your world and purify my truly darkened
soul from all sin, (through the protection of the incorporeal
powers), and save me.

Tone 5
O Light-giving Lord, send forth Your light and enlighten
my heart, (through the protection of the incorporeal powers),
and save me.

Tone 6
(Through the protection of the incorporeal powers), O
Lord, send forth Your eternal light to our souls.

122

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Tone 7
Raise me, O Lord, to sing Your praises, and teach me
to do Your will, O Holy One, (through the protection of the
incorporeal powers), and save me.

Tone 8
You Yourself are the light, O Christ, enlighten me with
this very light, (through the protection of the incorporeal
powers), and save me.
_________________________________________________
After this, the exapostilarion of the feast or of the day,
according to the typicon, in the appointed tone.

EXAPOSTILARIA FOR THE ENTIRE WEEK
Monday
According to: O Women, hear:
(Ženy uslyšite:  
)
Archangels and angels, principalities and dominions,
powers and virtues, thrones, and many-eyed cherubim and
six-winged seraphim, pray for us, that we be delivered from
affliction and unquenchable fire.
Or this:
As God, You adorned the heavens with the stars and
enlightened all the earth with the angels. O Creator of all
things, save us who sing to You.
123

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Theotokion:
You are my help, O most pure one, the strong support and
protection of the world, and I bow down to you and cry out:
Deliver me from all affliction and from the eternal fire, for in
you, O Virgin, is all my hope.

Tuesday
O most glorious prophet, and the Forerunner of grace, you
preached salvation through repentance for all and pointed out
the Lamb Who takes away the sins of the world, O blessed
one. Now pray to him to have mercy on the world.
Or this:
Let us all extol John the Forerunner, and the Baptizer of
the Savior, the prophet born of a prophet, the son of the desert
and born of Elizabeth.

Theotokion:
All the prophets prefigured you, O Virgin; David called
you a mountain, an ark, a lamp, a ladder, a manna-bearing
hand, and a life-budding staff. We also acknowledge you
fittingly as the Theotokos.

Wednesday and Friday
According to: O Women, hear:
)
(Ženy uslyšite:  
Invincible weapon and support of faith, O cross divine,
we sing to you and bow low before you in faith. You are the
refuge and glory of Christians, the guardian of the true faith
and pride of martyrs. It is indeed proper that we glorify you.
124

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Or this:
The cross is the defense of all the universe. The cross is
the beauty of the Church. The cross is the strength of rulers.
The cross is the support of all who believe. The cross is the
glory of angels but the wounding of demons.

Stavrotheotokion:
The most pure one, standing before the cross and seeing
her Son without sin dead on the wood, lamenting, and
shedding a mother’s tears, and cried: “What is this wonder,
that they have delivered the Creator of the world to be nailed
to a cross?”

Thursday
O apostles of the Lord: Peter and Paul, Andrew, James,
Bartholomew, and Matthew, James, Philip, Thomas, and
Simon, Luke, and John, and Mark: we, the faithful praise all
of you.
Or this:
According to: O Women, hear:
(Ženy uslyšite:  
)
To all who run beneath the sun, you have preached the
truth of Christ’s holy incarnation from the Virgin, you have
turned the people from error and enlightened them, and have
taught all to revere the Holy Trinity, O apostles of the Savior.

125

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Or another:
O holy twelve, glory of the apostles, with the precious
Nicholas, bishop of Myra, pray unceasingly to the Savior for
us.

Theotokion:
O Virgin untouched by temptation, with the wise apostles
and the hosts of martyrs, and with the wise Nicholas, pray
unceasingly to Christ that we be delivered from all danger,
and with boldness we may trust in you, O Maiden.

Friday
Rejoice, most holy cross, impregnable wall around the
world, refuge of the afflicted and protection of those in danger,
victory of kings and guard of armies, defeat of barbarians and
crown of apostles, and salvation of the faithful!
Or this:
The cross is the defense of all the universe. The cross is
the beauty of the Church. The cross is the strength of rulers.
The cross is the support of all who believe. The cross is the
glory of angels but the wounding of demons.

Stavrotheotokion:
Seeing You nailed to the cross, the most pure one cried
and moaned and uttered: “How can the Sun of glory set? O
primal Light, how could it be that You are nailed to a cross,
that You are pierced with a spear in Your side? This is for the
salvation of the human race, my Son and my God!”
126

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Saturday
O praiseworthy prophets, blessed apostles, righteous
patriarchs, unique succession of hierarchs, assembly of
venerable and righteous men and women, holy martyrs, pray,
all of you, with the Mother of God to the Lord to have mercy
on Your servants.
Or this:
O Source of all, as God You adorned heaven with stars.
You enlightened the whole earth with angels. Save those who
sing to You.
Another Hymn of Light for the departed:
As God You rule over the living and the dead. Give rest
to Your servants in the chosen place. Although they may have
sinned, O Savior, they did not abandon You.

Theotokion:
You are the delight of the angels, the joy of the sorrowful,
the protection of Christians, and the Virgin Mother of the
Lord. Help us, and deliver us from eternal pain.
And immediately

THE PRAISES
If, on the one hand, it is a saint celebrated with the Great
Doxology, Let everything that lives and that has breath is
sung, and the rest, as directed for Sunday Matins.
If, on the other hand, it is an ordinary day, immediately
the psalms.
127

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 148
Praise the Lord from the heavens,
Praise Him in the heights.
Praise him, all His angels,
Praise him, all His host.
Praise Him, sun and moon,
Praise Him shining stars.
Praise Him highest heavens
and the waters above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord.
He commanded; they were made.
He fixed them for ever,
gave a law which shall not pass away.
Praise the Lord from the earth,
sea creatures and all oceans,
fire and hail, snow and mist,
stormy winds that obey His word;
all mountains and hills,
all fruit trees and cedars,
beasts, wild and tame,
reptiles and birds on the wing;
all earth’s kings and peoples,
earth’s princes and rulers;
young men and maidens,
old men together with children.

128

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Let them praise the name of the Lord
for He alone is exalted.
The splendor of His name
reaches beyond heaven and earth.
He exalts the strength of His people.
He is the praise of all His saints,
of the sons of Israel,
of the people to whom He comes close.

Psalm 149
Sing a new song to the Lord,
His praise in the assembly of the faithful.
Let Israel rejoice in its Maker,
let Zion’s sons exult in their king.
Let them praise His name with dancing
and make music with timbrel and harp.
For the Lord takes delight in His people.
He crowns the poor with salvation.
Let the faithful rejoice in their glory,
Shout for joy and take their rest.
Let the praise of God be on their lips
And a two-edged sword in their hand,
to deal out vengeance to the nations
And punishment on all the peoples;
To bind their kings in chains
And their nobles in fetters of iron;

129

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

From here we begin the stichera, if it is:
On Six: to carry out the sentence pre-ordained: this honor
is for all His faithful.

Psalm 150
Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty
heavens.
On Four: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His
surpassing greatness.
O praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him with lute
and harp.
Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him with
strings and pipe.
O praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise Him
with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and that
breathes give praise to the Lord.
_________________________________________________
If it is the Forty Day Fast, the priest says this:
To You is due glory, O Lord our God, and we give glory to
You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Amen.
_________________________________________________
If indeed there are appointed stichera of the saint, or
the prefestive, or the postfestive, then after the stichera
immediately:
Glory to You Who have shown us the light!
130

Weekday and Lenten Matins

[The Doxology]
Glory to God in the highest, and to people on earth peace
and good will. We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,
we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory. Lord God,
heavenly King, Father Almighty; Lord, only-begotten Son,
Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, You take away the sin of the world, have mercy on
us. You take away the sins of the world, hear our prayer. You
are seated at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every day, and praise Your Name forever.
O Lord, You have been our refuge from one generation
to the next. I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul
for I have sinned against You. O Lord, I have fled to You for
refuge. Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my
God. In You is the source of life and in Your light we see light.
Extend Your mercy to those who know You.
Then:
Make us worthy, O Lord, to be kept sinless this morning.
Blessed are You, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and
praiseworthy and glorious is Your Name forever. Amen.
May Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us who have placed
our hope in You. Blessed are You, O Lord; teach me Your
commandments. Blessed are You, O Master; make me
understand Your commandments. Blessed are You, O Holy
One; enlighten me with Your commandments.
O Lord, Your mercy is forever; despise not the work of
Your hands. To You is due praise; to You is due a hymn; to
You is glory due, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever. Amen.
131

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, the deacon or the priest:
Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and
without sin, let us beseech the Lord.
After each of the following petitions, the choir sings:
Grant this, O Lord.
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide and guardian of our
souls and bodies, let us beseech the Lord.
For the pardon and remission of our sins and offenses, let
us beseech the Lord.
For what is good and beneficial to our souls and for peace
in the world, let us beseech the Lord.
That we may spend the rest of our life in peace and
repentance, let us beseech the Lord.
For a Christian, painless, unashamed, peaceful end of our
life, and for a good account before the fearsome judgmentseat of Christ, let us beseech the Lord.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
132

Weekday and Lenten Matins

Choir: To You, O Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For You are a merciful and gracious God, and You love
mankind, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be to all.
Choir: And to your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
And the priest says this prayer quietly:
Holy Lord, You dwell on high and look upon the lowly,
and with Your all-seeing eyes You watch over all creation.
To You we bend our neck in heart and body and we pray
to You, stretch forth Your invisible hand from Your holy
dwelling place and bless us all. If we have sinned voluntarily
or involuntarily forgive us as a good God Who loves mankind
and gives us earthly and heavenly gifts.
He says aloud:
For it is Yours to have mercy on us and to save us, O God,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

133

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, the Aposticha:
[Psalm 89]
Verse 1: In the morning, fill us with Your love; we shall
exult and rejoice all our days. Give us joy to balance our
affliction for the years when we knew misfortune. Show forth
Your work to Your servants; let Your glory shine on their
children.
Verse 2: Let the favor of the Lord, our God, be upon us;
give success to the work of our hands! Give success to the
work of our hands!
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion.
Then:
[Psalm 91]
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, and to sing praises
to Your Name, O most High. To proclaim Your mercy in the
morning, and Your faithfulness throughout the night.
After this, Trisagion. Most holy Trinity: Our Father:
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
Troparion of the Saint.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion.
And immediately the Ektenia of Supplication:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
134

Weekday and Lenten Matins

After each of the following petitions, the choir sings:
Lord, have mercy three times.
In parish churches:
Again we pray for our holy father, (Name), Pope of Rome,
and for our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for those who
serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual
fathers, and for all our brothers and sisters in Christ.
In monasteries:
Again we pray for our holy father (Name), Pope
of Rome, and for our most reverend Archbishop and
Metropolitan (Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name),
for our most venerable hieromonks: Proto-archimandrite
(Name), Archimandrite (Name), Proto-hegumen (Name), and
Hegumen (Name), for those who serve and have served in
this holy monastery, for our spiritual fathers, and for all our
brothers and sisters in Christ.
Again we pray for our government (or for our Godprotected Emperor or King whose realm it is Name for his
health and salvation) and for all in the service of our country.
Again we pray for the people here present who await Your
great and abundant mercy, for those who show us mercy, and
for all Christians of the true faith.
The priest exclaims:
For You are a merciful God and You love mankind, and
we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
135

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

After the exclamation, the deacon: Wisdom!
But the Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is,
always, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And immediately the First Hour is read. At the conclusion
of the First Hour, the priest makes the solemn dismissal.
_________________________________________________
If it is the Forty Day Fast:
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, and to sing praises
to Your Name, O most High. To proclaim Your mercy in the
morning, and Your faithfulness throughout the night. Twice.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father: the
priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
And we say:
Standing in the temple of Your glory is like standing in
heaven itself. O Theotokos and gate of heaven, open for us the
doors of your mercy.
Then, Lord, have mercy. Forty times. Master, give the
blessing.
The priest:
Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is, always, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
136

Weekday and Lenten Matins

The priest:
Heavenly King, strengthen our government (or our Godprotected Emperor or our King Name), confirm the faith, calm
the nations, give peace to the world, preserve well this city
(or village, or this holy monastery). Grant our fathers and
brothers and sisters who have departed before us repose in the
abode of the just, and accept us in repentance and confession,
for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. Three times. Glory: now
and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
The priest reads the prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit
of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
137

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then twelve bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner. Bow.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
Bow.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
Bow.
And again the entire prayer of Saint Ephrem with one
prostration after its conclusion.
And after the prostrations, the First Hour.
_________________________________________________

138

Weekday and Lenten Matins

THE DAILY DISMISSALS
Monday
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; through the
protection of the honorable and heavenly angelic powers;
through the prayers of the holy, glorious, and illustrious
apostles; of the holy (Name/s), the patron[s] [patroness] of
this church; of the holy (Name/s of the saint/s whose day it
is); and through the prayers of all the saints; for Christ is good
and loves mankind.

Tuesday
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save
us through the prayers of His most pure Mother; and of the
honorable and glorious prophet, Forerunner, and baptist John;
of the holy, glorious, and illustrious apostles; and the rest.

Wednesday and Friday
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; by the power of
the precious and life-creating cross; through the prayers of the
holy, glorious, and illustrious apostles; and the rest.

Thursday
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; and of the holy,
glorious, and illustrious apostles; of our holy father Nicholas
the Wonder-worker, archbishop of Myra; and the rest.

139

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Saturday
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; by the power
of the precious and life-creating cross; through the protection
of the honorable and heavenly angelic powers; through the
prayers of the honorable and glorious prophet, Forerunner,
and baptist John; of the holy, glorious, and illustrious apostles;
of our holy father Nicholas the Wonder-worker, archbishop
of Myra; of the holy, glorious, and victorious martyrs; of
our venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and just
ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; and the rest.

140

SUNDAY AND FESTAL MATINS
After the blessing, Sunday and Festal Matins begin the
same as Daily Matins, refer to pages 85 to 105.
After the Great Ektenia, refer to page 106, the following is
sung in the tone of the troparion of the day:
[Psalm 117]
The Lord is God and has revealed Himself to us; blessed
is He Who comes in the Name of the Lord.
Verse 1: Give thanks to the Lord for He is good; for His
love endures forever.
Verse 2: They encircled me, compassed me about; in the
Lord’s Name I crushed them.
Verse 3: I shall not die, I shall live and recount the deeds
of the Lord.
Verse 4: The stone which the builders rejected has become
the cornerstone. This is the work of the Lord, a marvel in our
eyes.
After The Lord is God, we say the appointed troparion
twice and the theotokion in the same tone. If two troparia are
appointed, the first is always said twice, then the second and
the theotokion are said.
Then the stichologia of the Psalter.
141

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

After the completion of the first stichologion, the deacon
or the priest does the Little Ektenia:
Again and again let us pray to the Lord in peace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
Exclamation:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the Sessional Hymn according to the
order.
After the Second Stichologion: Again and again: and the
rest.
Exclamation:
For You, O God, are good and You love mankind, and to
You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the Sessional Hymn according to the
order.
After this, on Feasts and, if prescribed, on Sunday is sung:
142

Sunday and Festal Matins

THE POLYELEOS
Psalm 134
Praise the name of the Lord, praise him, servants of the
Lord.
Versicle: Alleluia Three times.
Who stand in the house of the Lord in the courts of the
house of our God.
Praise the Lord for the Lord is good. Sing a psalm to His
name for He is loving.
For the Lord has chosen Jacob for Himself and Israel for
His own possession.
For I know that the Lord is great, that our Lord is high
above all gods.
The Lord does whatever He wills, in heaven, on earth, in
the seas.
He summons clouds from the ends of the earth; makes
lightning produce the rain; from His treasuries He sends forth
the wind.
The first-born of the Egyptians He smote, of man and
beast alike.
Signs and wonders He worked in the midst of your land,
O Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his servants.
Nations in their greatness He struck and kings in their
splendor He slew.
Sihon, king of the Amorites, Og, the king of Bashan, and
all the kingdoms of Canaan.
He let Israel inherit their land; on His people their land
He bestowed.

143

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Lord, Your name stands forever, unforgotten from age to
age.
For the Lord does justice for His people; the Lord takes
pity on His servants.
Pagan idols are silver and gold, the work of human hands.
They have mouths, but cannot speak; they have eyes but
they cannot see.
They have ears but they cannot hear; there is never a
breath on their lips.
Their makers will come to be like them and so will all
who trust in them!
Sons of Israel, bless the Lord! Sons of Aaron, bless the
Lord!
Sons of Levi, bless the Lord! You who fear Him, bless
the Lord!
From Zion may the Lord be blessed, He Who dwells in
Jerusalem!

Psalm 135
O give thanks to the Lord for He is good, for His love
endures for ever.
Versicle: Alleluia. Three times.
Give thanks to the God of gods, for His love endures for
ever.
Give thanks to the Lord of lords, for His love endures for
ever.
Who alone has wrought marvelous works, for His love
endures for ever.
Whose wisdom made the skies, for His love endures for
ever.

144

Sunday and Festal Matins

Who fixed the earth firmly on the seas, for His love
endures for ever.
It was He Who made the great lights, for His love endures
for ever.
The sun to rule in the day, for His love endures for ever.
The moon and stars in the night, for His love endures for
ever.
The first-born of the Egyptians He smote, for His love
endures for ever.
He brought Israel out from their midst, for His love
endures for ever.
Arm outstretched, with power in His hand, for His love
endures for ever.
He divided the Red Sea in two, for His love endures for
ever.
He made Israel pass through the midst, for His love
endures for ever.
He flung Pharaoh and his force into the sea, for His love
endures for ever.
Through the desert His people He led, for His love endures
for ever.
Nations in their greatness He struck, for His love endures
for ever.
Kings in their splendor He slew, for His love endures for
ever.
Sihon, king of the Amorities, for His love endures for
ever.
And Og, king of Bashan, for His love endures for ever.
He let Israel inherit their land, for His love endures for
ever.
On His servant their land He bestowed, for His love
endures for ever.
145

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

He remembered us in our distress, for His love endures
for ever.
And He snatched us away from our foes, for His love
endures for ever.
He gives food to all living things, for His love endures
for ever.
To the God of heaven give thanks, for His love endures
for ever.
_________________________________________________
On Sunday the choir immediately sings these:

TROPARIA OF THE RESURRECTION

Tone 5.
Verse: Blessed are You, O Lord; teach me Your
commandments.
The assembly of angels were amazed when they beheld
You, O Savior, among the dead. Destroying the power of
Death, You raised Adam with You and freed everyone from
Hades.
The radiant angel standing in the tomb said to the myrrhbearing women: “O disciples, why do you mingle tears of pity
with fragrant spices? Behold the tomb and understand that the
Savior is risen from the dead.”
Very early in the morning, the myrrh-bearing women
hastened with lamentation to Your tomb. But an angel stood
before them and said: “The time for lamenting is no more. Do
not weep but announce the resurrection to the apostles.”
O Savior, the myrrh-bearing women coming to Your tomb
with fragrant spices were weeping, and an angel spoke to them
saying: “Why do you think the living to be dead? For, as God,
He is risen from the tomb.”
146

Sunday and Festal Matins

Glory: Trinitarian Hymn:
Let us worship the Father, and His Son, and the Holy
Spirit—the Holy Trinity, one in essence—crying out with the
seraphim: “Holy, holy, holy are You, O Lord!”
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Virgin, in giving birth to the Giver of Life, you delivered
Adam from sin, and you granted Eve joy instead of sorrow;
for He Who became incarnate of you is God and man, and has
restored to life those fallen from it.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
After the troparia The Assembly of angels: the Little
Ektenia and the Exclamation:
For blessed is Your Name, and glorified is Your kingdom,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Then the Hypakoj and the Hymns of Ascent of the tone.
_________________________________________________
If the Second, Third and Seventeenth Kathisma, that is,
“The Blameless,” are read, after the first two the deacon
says the ektenia, but after the Seventeenth, immediately the
choir sings the Troparia of the Resurrection: The assembly
of angels. After this, the Little Ektenia with the Exclamation:

147

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For blessed is Your Name:
Then, the Hypakoj and the Hymns of Ascent of the tone.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is a feast, after the conclusion of the
Polyeleos, the Magnification is sung. After this, if it is not
Sunday, immediately the Little Ektenia with the Exclamation:
For blessed is Your Name:
And the Sessional Hymns of the feast are sung and these
Hymns of Ascent in Tone 4:
From my youth, many passions assail me; but, O my
Savior, protect and save me.
All who hate Sion shall be confounded by the Lord, for
you will wither like grass before the fire.
Glory: now and ever:
Every soul is made to live by the Holy Spirit; and by the
Holy Spirit is purified and illumined mystically by the One
God in Three Persons.
_________________________________________________
After the Hymns of Ascent, immediately the deacon says:
Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be to all!
Deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive!

148

Sunday and Festal Matins

And the prokeimenon of the tone or of the feast. And
again, the deacon:
Let us pray to the Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For You are holy, O our God, and You dwell in the holy
place, and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Deacon:
[Psalm 148:1]
Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to
the Lord.
The Choir sings: Let everything that lives and that
breathes give praise to the Lord.
However, the deacon says the verses:
Verse 1: Praise God in His holy place.
Verse 2: Praise Him in His mighty heavens.
Choir: Let everything that lives and that breathes give
praise to the Lord.
And after this the deacon exclaims:
That we may be deemed worthy of hearing the holy
gospel, let us pray to the Lord God.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Deacon: Wisdom, let us stand and listen to the holy
gospel.

149

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And the priest: Peace be to all!
Choir: And to your spirit! And immediately:
A reading from the holy gospel according to (Name).
Choir: Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You!
Deacon: Let us be attentive! And the priest reads the
gospel of Matins.
_________________________________________________
After the proclamation of the gospel, if it is Sunday, the
deacon reads:
Having beheld the resurrection of Christ let us worship the
holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross,
O Christ, and we glorify and praise Your holy Resurrection.
You are our God, and besides You we recognize no other,
and we call upon Your Name. Come, all you faithful, and let
us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ since, through the
cross, joy has come to all the world. Ever blessing the Lord,
let us extol His Resurrection since He, having suffered the
crucifixion, has destroyed Death by His death.
_________________________________________________
[Morning Praise]
After this, Psalm 50:
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.

150

Sunday and Festal Matins

My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge
O see, in guilt I was born,
a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom
O sprinkle me with hyssop then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervour sustain me,
That I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.

151

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,
burnt offering from me You would refuse,
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, O God, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion:
Rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
(burnt offerings wholly consumed).
then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
Then the stichera of the feast are sung, or these hymns:
Glory:
Through the prayers of the holy apostles, O Merciful One,
cleanse our many sins.
Now and ever:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Merciful One,
cleanse our many sins.
Then, Tone 6:
[Psalm 50:1]
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your
compassion blot out my offense.
152

Sunday and Festal Matins

Then, if it is Sunday:
Jesus is risen from the tomb, as He foretold, and granted
us everlasting life and great mercy.
If it is a feast the stichera of the feast are sung.
_________________________________________________
If it is the Sunday of the Publican, or of the Prodigal, or
of Meat-Fare or Cheese-Fare, and on the following Sundays
of the Great Fast, instead of Through the prayers of the holy
apostles:
Glory: Tone 8:
Open to me the doors of repentance, O Giver of Life.
For my spirit rises early in the morning to Your holy temple,
bearing the temple of my body all defiled. But as You are
compassionate, purify it by Your compassionate mercies.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Lead me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos, for I
have condemned myself with shameful sins and have wasted
all my life in slothfulness. Through your prayers deliver me
from all impurity.
Then, Tone 6:
[Psalm 50:1]
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your
compassion blot out my offense.
153

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

After that:
When I think of the multitude of my evil deeds, in my
wretchedness I tremble for the fearsome Day of Judgment.
But trusting in the mercy of Your compassion, O Lord, I cry
to You like David: “Have mercy on me, O God, according to
Your great mercy.”
_________________________________________________
Then the deacon or the priest says the prayer:
Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance.
Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the
Christian people of the true faith and send down upon us Your
abundant mercy. Through the prayers of our all-pure Lady,
the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of
the precious and life-creating cross; through the protection
of the honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the
honorable, glorious, Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John;
of the holy, glorious, and praiseworthy apostles (or of the holy
apostle and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles); and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra in Lycia; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-tothe-apostles, teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing
great prince Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy
Priest-Martyr Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony
and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our
venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous
154

Sunday and Festal Matins

ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose
church it is), Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate; and
of all the saints; we pray You, O most merciful Lord, hear us
sinners praying to You, and have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
The priest exclaims:
Through the mercy and compassion and loving-kindness
of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed,
together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And we begin the scriptural canticles and the canons.
After the Third Ode the deacon does the Little Ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For You are our God, and to You we give glory, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Then the Sessional Hymn from the Menaion.
After the Sixth Ode, the ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
155

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Exclamation:
For You are the King of peace and the Savior of our souls,
and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
The kontakion and the ikos, and the reading from the
Synaxarion.
After the completion of the katavasia of the Eighth Ode,
the deacon or the priest exclaims:
Let us greatly extol the Theotokos and the Mother of
Light in hymns!

The Canticle of the Theotokos
My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in
God, my Savior.
After each of the following we sing the verse, if directed
by the typicon:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Because He has regarded the humility of His handmaid,
for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed.
Because He Who is mighty has done great things for me,
and holy is His Name, and His love is from generation to
generation to those who fear Him.
156

Sunday and Festal Matins

He has shown might with His arm; He has scattered the
proud in the conceit of their heart.
He has put down the mighty from their seat and has
exalted the humble; He has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich He has sent away empty.
He has received Israel His servant, being mindful of His
love, as He spoke to our Fathers: to Abraham and to his seed
forever.
After the Ninth Ode, the ektenia:
Again and again: Protect us, save us: Commemorating
our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For all the heavenly powers praise You, and we give glory
to You, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
[Prokeimenon Psalm 98:5]
After that, the deacon, if directed by the typicon, says:
Holy is the Lord, our God!
The choir sings: Holy is the Lord, our God!
Verse: Exalt the Lord, our God! Bow before His footstool,
for He is holy!
The choir sings: Holy is the Lord, our God!
157

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Exapostilarion of the resurrection, or of the feast, or
of the day, according to the typicon. And immediately:

THE PRAISES
in the appointed Tone
Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to
the Lord.

Psalm 148
Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the
heights.
Verse: To You is due a hymn, O God!
Praise Him, all His angels, praise Him, all His hosts.
To You is due a hymn, O God!
Praise him, sun and moon,
Praise him, shining stars.
Praise him, highest heavens
And the waters above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord,
He commanded: they were made.
He fixed them for ever,
gave a law which shall not pass away.
Praise the Lord from the earth,
sea creatures and all oceans,
fire and hail, snow and mist,
stormy winds that obey His word;
158

Sunday and Festal Matins

all mountains and hills,
all fruit trees and cedars,
beasts, wild and tame,
reptiles and birds on the wing;
all earth’s kings and peoples,
earth’s princes and rulers;
young men and maidens,
old men together with children.
Let them praise the name of the Lord
for He alone is exalted.
The splendor of His name
reaches beyond heaven and earth.
He exalts the strength of His people.
He is the praise of all His saints,
of the sons of Israel,
of the people to whom He comes close.

Psalm 149
Sing a new song to the Lord,
His praise in the assembly of the faithful.
Let Israel rejoice in its Maker,
let Zion’s sons exalt in their king.
Let them praise His name with dancing
and make music with timbrel and harp.
For the Lord takes delight in His people.
He crowns the poor with salvation.
159

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let the faithful rejoice in their glory,
Shout for joy and take their rest.
Let the praise of God be on their lips
And a two-edged sword in their hand,
To deal out vengeance to the nations
And punishment on all the peoples;
To bind their kings in chains
And their nobles in fetter of iron;
From here we begin the stichera, if it is:
On Six: to carry out the sentence pre-ordained: this honor
is for all His faithful.

Psalm 150
Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty
heavens.
On Four: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His
surpassing greatness.
O praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him with lute
and harp.
Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him with
strings and pipe.
O praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise Him
with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and that
breathes give praise to the Lord.
Glory, The sticheron of the Gospel or of the feast.
160

Sunday and Festal Matins

Now and ever: The appointed Theotokion Tone 2.
You are most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos. Through the
One Who was incarnate of you, Hades is made captive, Adam
is restored; the curse is destroyed; Eve is freed; Death put to
death, and we have been made alive. Therefore, we cry out in
praise: Blessed are You, O Christ, our God, Who so willed.
Glory to You.
The priest exclaims:
Glory to You Who have shown us the light!
[Great Doxology]
Glory to God in the highest, and to people on earth, peace
and good will. We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,
we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory. Lord God,
heavenly King, Father Almighty; Lord, only-begotten Son,
Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, You take away the sin of the world, have mercy on
us. You take away the sins of the world, hear our prayer. You
are seated at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every day, and praise Your Name forever.
Make us worthy, O Lord, to be kept sinless this morning.
Blessed are You, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and praiseworthy and glorious is Your Name forever. Amen.
May Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us who have placed
our hope in You. Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your
commandments. Blessed are You, O Master, make me
understand Your commandments. Blessed are You, O Holy
One, enlighten me with Your commandments.
161

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Lord, You have been our refuge from one generation
to the next. I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul
for I have sinned against You. O Lord, I have fled to You for
refuge. Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my
God. In You is the source of life and in Your light we see light.
Extend Your mercy to those who know You.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.
Then in a stronger voice, once:
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us.
If it is a feast of the Master or of the Theotokos, the
troparion of the feast.
If it is Sunday, we say the troparion of the resurrection.
On Sundays of the first, third, fifth, and seventh tones, we say
this troparion:
Today salvation has come to the world. Let us sing to Him
Who is risen from the tomb, the Source of our life, Who has
crushed Death by death, and bestowed on us victory and great
mercy.

162

Sunday and Festal Matins

On Sundays of the second, fourth, sixth, and eighth tones, we
say this troparion:
Rising from the tomb and breaking the bonds of Hades,
O Lord, You abolished the sentence of Death, delivering all
from the snares of the enemy. Then You revealed Yourself to
Your apostles and sent them forth to preach, and through them
You have granted Your peace to the whole world, You Who
alone are most merciful.
Then, the ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God:
Again we pray for our holy:
Again we pray for our government:
Again we pray for the people here present:
The priest exclaims:
For You are a merciful:
Then, the deacon or the priest:
Let us complete our morning prayer:
Protect us, save us:
That this whole day:
For an angel of peace:
For the pardon and remission:
163

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For what is good and beneficial:
That we may spend the rest of our life:
For a Christian, painless, unashamed, peaceful end:
Commemorating our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For You are a merciful and gracious God: (see page 133).
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be to all.
Choir: And to your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
And the priest says this prayer quietly:
Holy Lord, You dwell on high and look upon the lowly,
and with Your all-seeing eyes You watch over all creation.
To You we bend our neck in heart and body and we pray
to You, stretch forth Your invisible hand from Your holy
dwelling place and bless us all. If we have sinned voluntarily
or involuntarily forgive us as a good God Who loves mankind
and gives us earthly and heavenly gifts.
He says aloud:
For Yours are mercy and salvation, O Christ our God, and
we give glory to You, with Your eternal Father and Your lifecreating Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
164

Sunday and Festal Matins

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest:
Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is, always, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. O God, strengthen the holy orthodox (or
catholic) faith, forever and ever.
Priest: O most holy Theotokos, save us!
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond
compare more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave
birth to God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Priest: Glory to You, O Christ God, our hope; glory to
You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy, three
times. Master, give the blessing.
The priest makes the dismissal of the feast, if directed, or
of the day.
The dismissal of Sunday:
May Christ our true God, risen from the dead, have mercy
on us and save us, through the prayers of His most pure
Mother; of the holy, glorious, and illustrious apostles; and of
Saint patron(ess) of this church; and of Saint whose day it is;
and of all the saints; for He is good and loves mankind.
After the dismissal, immediately the First Hour is read:
Come, let us worship: and the psalms.
165

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

166

MATINS FOR THE DEPARTED
Sung on Saturday.
After the Great Ektenia (pp. 104-105), Alleluia is sung
three times in Tone 8. We say these verses:
Verse 1: Blessed are they whom You have chosen and
received, O Lord.
Verse 2: They are remembered from generation to
generation.
Verse 3: Their souls will dwell among the good.
Then, these troparia, Tone 2:
Apostles, martyrs, and prophets, bishops, venerable and
righteous saints, you have finished the course and have kept
the faith. Since you can approach the Savior with confidence,
we ask you to beseech His goodness on our behalf, for the
salvation of our souls.
Glory:
O Lord, in Your goodness, remember Your servants and
forgive whatever sins they committed in their life; for no one
is sinless but You alone. You have the power to grant rest to
the departed.
167

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Theotokion:
O holy Mother of the Inexpressible Light, we honor you
with angelic hymns, and we extol you with great devotion.
_________________________________________________
On the Saturdays of Meat-Fare and before Pentecost we
sing these troparia, Tone 8:
In the depth of Your wisdom, O only Creator, You govern
all with love and supply the needs of each. Now give rest to
the souls of Your servants, for they have placed their hope in
You, our Creator, Maker, and our God.
Glory: now and ever:
We have in you a defense and a refuge, and an advocate
acceptable to God to Whom you gave birth, O Virgin
Theotokos, the salvation of the faithful.
_________________________________________________
And the stichologia of the Psalter.
Then, the Little Ektenia with the exclamation:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the Sessional Hymn, from the tone of
the Octoechos.
After this we sing “The Blameless.” We divide them into
two stations.
168

Matins for the Departed

[First Station]
[The Seventeenth Kathisma, Psalm 118]
They are happy whose life is blameless, who follow the
law of the Lord.
And at the end of each verse we sing:
Remember, O Lord, the souls of Your departed servants.
They are happy who do His will, seeking Him with all
their hearts.
The law of Your mouth means more to me than thousands
in gold and silver.
Your hands have created me and formed me.
Had not Your law been my delight, I would have died in
my affliction.
I will never forget Your precepts, for with them You give
me life.
This verse is sung three times.
And the Ektenia for the Departed is read:
Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Again, let us pray for the repose of the souls of the departed
servants of God (Names), and that their every transgression,
voluntary or involuntary, be forgiven them.
Choir: Lord, have mercy, once.
169

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

May the Lord God commit their souls to the place where
the just repose.
Choir: Lord, have mercy, once.
For the mercy of God, for the kingdom of heaven, and for
the remission of their sins, let us beseech Christ, the Immortal
King and our God.
Choir: Grant this, O Lord.
Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
The priest says this prayer:
O God of spirits and of all flesh, You trampled death
and broke the power of the devil and granted life to Your
world. Now grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Your departed
servants (Names), in a place of light, joy, and peace where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning. As a good and loving
God, forgive every sin committed by them in word, deed, or
thought, since there is no one who lives and does not sin. You
alone are without sin; Your justice is eternal justice; and Your
word is truth.
But the second priest says the exclamation:
For You, O Christ our God, are the resurrection, the life,
and the repose of Your departed servants (Name), and we give
glory to You, with Your eternal Father, and Your all-holy,
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And after this we begin the second station.
170

Matins for the Departed

[Second Station]
Save me, for I am Yours.
And at the end of each verse we say:
Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Your servants.
Your word is a lamp for my steps and a light for my path.
I open my mouth and sigh as I yearn for Your commands.
Turn to me in mercy as You turn to those who love Your
Name.
Lord, let my cry come before You; teach me by Your word.
Give life to my soul that I may praise You, let Your decrees
give me help.
I am lost like a sheep; seek Your servant, for I remember
Your command.
This verse is sung three times.
Then we sing the Troparia for the Departed in Tone 5:
Versicle: Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your
commandments.
The choir of Saints has found the fountain of life and the
gate of Paradise. May I also find the path through repentance.
I am the lost sheep, call me back, O Savior, and save me.
Fashioning me from nothing long ago, You honored me
with Your divine image. For transgressing Your commandment
You returned me again to the earth from which I had been
taken. Lead me back to Your likeness and reform the original
beauty.
171

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

I am the image of Your ineffable glory even though I bear
the scars of my transgressions. Take pity on Your creature,
O Master, and purify me in Your compassion. Grant me the
homeland for which I yearn, and, again, make me a citizen of
paradise.
Come all of you who have walked the narrow and difficult
path in life, who have taken up the cross like a yoke, and
followed Me in faith: Enjoy the rewards prepared for you,
and the heavenly crowns.
You saints who preached the Lamb of God and like lambs
were slain; you martyrs who have been transferred to invisible
and un-aging life; pray to Him insistently to grant us remission
of our trespasses.
Grant rest, O God, to Your servants, and place them in
Paradise, where the choirs of saints and righteous shine like
stars. O Lord, grant rest to Your servants who have fallen
asleep, and overlook all their faults.
Glory: Trinitarian Hymn:
Let us piously sing hymns to the three-fold brilliance of
the one divinity, crying out: Holy are You, the Father without
beginning, the Son Who was in the beginning with You, and
the divine Spirit. Enlighten us who serve You with faith, and
snatch us out of the eternal fire.

172

Matins for the Departed

Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, pure one who bore God in the flesh for the
salvation of all. Through you, the human race has found
salvation. Through you, may we also find paradise, pure,
blessed Theotokos.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
Then, the deacon:
Again and again:
Again let us pray for the repose:
Let us also pray:
For the mercy of God:
Let us pray to the Lord, and the priest prays: O God of
spirits: with the exclamation: For You are the resurrection:
refer to page 170.
After the exclamation we sing the Sessional Hymn,
Tone 5:
Our Savior give rest to Your servants among the just,
and make them dwell in Your courts, as it is written. In Your
goodness, overlook their voluntary and involuntary sins
and all those done knowingly or unknowingly, O Lover of
Mankind.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O Christ God, You dawned upon the world from the
Virgin, and through her show us to be children of light; have
mercy on us.
173

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, Psalm 50: refer to page 114.
And the canon is sung according to the typicon.
After the Third Ode the deacon does the usual Little
Ektenia:
Again and again:
Protect us, save us:
Commemorating our most holy, most pure:
Exclamation:
For You are our God: refer to page 155.
The kontakion and the sessional hymn from the menaion
according to the typicon.
After the Sixth Ode the Little Ektenia for the departed and
the prayer: O God of spirits: refer to page 170.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants, where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
Ikos
You alone are immortal, Creator and Maker of Mankind.
We mortals were formed out of earth and we will return to the
same earth, as You, my Maker, commanded when You said to
me, “You are dust and shall return to dust,” where all mortals
will go, singing as our funeral hymn, “Alleluia.” [Alleluia]
Three times.

174

Matins for the Departed

After the conclusion of the katavasia of the eighth ode, the
Canticle of the Theotokos is sung: refer to page 118.
After the Ninth Ode:
It is truly proper to glorify you, O Theotokos, the everblessed, immaculate, and the mother of our God. More
honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to God
the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
And the deacon the Little Ektenia:
Again and again: refer to page 119.
Then, the exapostilarion of the octoechos.
_________________________________________________
On Saturday of Meat-Fare we sing this Hymn of Light:
According to: Heaven with the stars:
(Nebo zv’izdami:  
)
O God, You are the Ruler of the living and the dead. Give
rest to Your servants in the dwelling places of Your elect; and
although they have sinned, O God, our Savior, they have not
turned away from You.
Glory: According to: O Women, hear:
(Ženy uslyšite:  
)
Give rest to Your servants, O Lord, in the land of the
living, where there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning; in Your
love for mankind forgive all the sins they have committed
in life, for You alone are without sin, and You alone are the
merciful One, O Master of the living and the dead.
175

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Mary the Bride of God, intercede unceasingly with
Christ for us your servants, in the company of the inspired
prophets, the assembly of martyrs, the hierarchs and venerable
men and women, and all the righteous, that we may have a
share of the kingdom of heaven.
But on the Saturday before Pentecost we say this Hymn
of Light:
According to: Heaven with the stars:
(Nebo zv’izdami:  
)
Let us celebrate, O faithful, the memory of all who repose
in Christ, and let us remember the last day, and ceaselessly
implore Christ for ourselves and for the departed.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O sweetness of the angels, joy of the afflicted, the
protection of Christians, and the Mother of the Lord, protect
us and deliver us from eternal pain.
_________________________________________________

176

Matins for the Departed

And immediately

THE PRAISES
in the appointed tone.
Praise the Lord from the heavens: and the rest, refer to
page 128.
At the Praises we sing the stichera of the martyrs of the
tone.
The Little Doxology, refer to page 131.
And after that the ektenia:
Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole day be perfect, holy, peaceful, and without
sin, let us beseech the Lord.
After each of the following petitions, the choir sings:
Grant this, O Lord.
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide and guardian of our
souls and bodies, let us beseech the Lord.
For the pardon and remission of our sins and offenses, let
us beseech the Lord.
For what is good and beneficial to our souls and for peace
in the world, let us beseech the Lord.
177

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

That we may spend the rest of our life in peace and
repentance, let us beseech the Lord.
For a Christian, painless, unashamed, peaceful end of our
life, and for a good account before the fearsome judgmentseat of Christ, let us beseech the Lord.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For You are a merciful and gracious God, and You love
mankind, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, now and ever, and forever.
Choir: Amen. And the prayer, refer to page 133.
Then, the Aposticha according to the typicon.
After this:
[Psalm 91]
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, and to sing praises
to Your Name, O most High. To proclaim Your mercy in the
morning and Your faithfulness throughout the night.
Then, Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: The
priest: For Thine is the kingdom: and these troparia, Tone 2:

178

Matins for the Departed

Apostles, martyrs, and prophets, bishops, venerable and
righteous saints, you have finished the course and have kept
the faith. Since you can approach the Savior with confidence,
we ask you to beseech His goodness on our behalf, for the
salvation of our souls.
Glory:
O Lord, in Your goodness, remember Your servants and
forgive whatever sins they committed in their life; for no one
is sinless but You alone. You have the power to grant rest to
the departed.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Mother of the Inexpressible Light, we honor you with
angelic hymns, and we extol you with great devotion.
_________________________________________________
On the Saturdays of Meat-Fare and before Pentecost we
sing these troparia, Tone 8:
In the depth of Your wisdom, O only Creator, You govern
all with love and supply the needs of each. Now give rest to
the souls of Your servants, for they have placed their hope in
You, our Creator, Maker, and our God.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
We have in you a defense and a refuge, and an advocate
acceptable to God to Whom you gave birth, O Virgin
Theotokos, the salvation of the faithful.
_________________________________________________

179

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

After this the deacon says the ektenia: Have mercy on us,
O God: refer to page 134.

The Dismissal:
May Christ our true God Who rules over the living and
the dead, place the souls of His departed servants (Names),
in the abode of the just and grant them rest in the bosom of
Abraham and number them among the just, and have mercy
on us through the prayers of His most pure Mother; and of the
holy, glorious, and illustrious apostles; of our venerable and
God-bearing fathers; and through the prayers of all the saints;
for Christ is good and loves mankind.
Then, the priest exclaims:
In blessed repose, grant, O Lord, eternal rest to the souls
of Your ever-to-be-remembered departed servants, (Names),
and remember them forever.
Choir: Eternal Memory. Three times.

180

THE ORDER OF THE HOURS
ORDER OF THE FIRST HOUR
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.
Then, the psalms:

Psalm 5
To my words give ear, O Lord,
give heed to my groaning.
Attend to the sound of my cries,
my King and my God.
It is You Whom I invoke, O Lord.
In the morning You hear me;
in the morning I offer You my prayer,
watching and waiting.
You are no God Who loves evil;
no sinner is Your guest.
The boastful shall not stand their ground
before Your face.
181

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You hate all who do evil;
You destroy all who lie.
The deceitful and bloodthirsty man
The Lord detests.
But I through the greatness of Your love
have access to Your house.
I bow down before Your holy temple,
filled with awe.
Lead me, Lord, in Your justice,
because of those who lie in wait;
make clear Your way before me.
No truth can be found in their mouths,
their heart is all mischief,
their throat a wide-open grave,
all honey their speech.
Declare them guilty, O God.
Let them fail in their designs.
Drive them out for their many offenses;
for they have defied You.
All those You protect shall be glad
and ring out their joy.
You shelter them; in You they rejoice,
those who love Your name.
It is You Who bless the just man, Lord;
You surround him with favor as with a shield.
182

Order of the First Hour

Psalm 89
O Lord, You have been our refuge
from one generation to the next.
Before the mountains were born
or the earth or the world brought forth,
You are God, without beginning or end.
You turn men back into dust
and say: ‘Go back, sons of men.’
To Your eyes a thousand years
are like yesterday, come and gone,
no more than a watch in the night.
You sweep men away like a dream,
like grass which springs up in the morning.
In the morning it springs up and flowers;
by evening it withers and fades.
So we are destroyed in Your anger
struck with terror in Your fury.
Our guilt lies open before You;
our secrets in the light of Your face.
All our days pass away in Your anger.
Our life is over like a sigh.
Our span is seventy years
or eighty for those who are strong.
And most of these are emptiness and pain.
They pass swiftly and we are gone.

183

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Who understands the power of Your anger
and fears the strength of Your fury?
Make us know the shortness of our life
that we may gain wisdom of heart.
Lord, relent! Is Your anger for ever?
Show pity to Your servants.
In the morning fill us with Your love;
we shall exult and rejoice all our days.
Give us joy to balance our affliction
for the years when we knew misfortune.
Show forth Your work to Your servants;
Let Your glory shine on their children.
Let the favor of the Lord be upon us:
Give success to the work of our hands.
Give success to the work of our hands.

Psalm 100
My song is of mercy and justice;
I sing to You, O Lord.
I will walk in the way of perfection.
O when, Lord, will You come?
I will walk with blameless heart
within my house;
I will not set before my eyes
whatever is base.
184

Order of the First Hour

I will hate the ways of the crooked;
they shall not be my friends.
The false-hearted must keep far away;
the wicked I disown.
The man who slanders his neighbor in secret
I will bring to silence.
The man of proud looks and haughty heart
I will never endure.
I look to the faithful in the land
That they may dwell with me.
He who walks in the way of perfection
shall be my friend.
No man who practices deceit
shall live within my house.
No man who utters lies shall stand
before my eyes.
Morning by morning I will silence
all the wicked in the land,
uprooting from the Lord’s city
all who do evil.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times. Three bows.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
185

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And if, indeed, The Lord is God is sung, we say: Glory,
the troparion of the day, or of the feast, or of the saint. Now
and ever, the theotokion:
What shall we call you, O Full of Grace? A Heaven, for
you gave rise to the Sun of Justice? A Paradise, for you have
brought forth the Flower of incorruption? A Virgin, for you
have remained undefiled? A pure Mother, holding in her holy
arms the Son Who is the God of all? Intercede with Him for
the salvation of our souls.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung], we
say the troparion in Tone 6:
In the morning You hear my voice, O my King and my
God. [Psalm 5:4]
Verse 1: To my words give ear, O Lord, give heed to my
groaning. [Psalm 5:2]
Verse 2: It is You Whom I invoke, O Lord. [Psalm 5:3-4]
To each of these verses we sing in response:
In the morning You hear me:
Then, Glory, now and ever, the theotokion:
What shall we call you, O Full of Grace: and the rest.
If appointed by the typicon, the stichologia of the Psalter,
and after that the troparion: In the morning:
_________________________________________________
186

Order of the First Hour

[Psalm 118: 133-135]
Let my steps be guided by Your promise; let no evil rule
over me. Redeem me from man’s oppression and I will keep
Your precepts. During the Forty Day Fast, twice.
Let Your face shine on Your servant and teach me Your
decrees. During the Forty Day Fast, twice.
[Psalm 70: 8]
My lips are filled with Your praise, with Your glory all the
day long. During the Forty Day Fast, three times.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father: the
priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
And the kontakion of the day, or of the feast, or of the
saint.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is the Forty Day Fast or there is no
kontakion, say these troparia in tone 4:
Come to us in haste, O Christ our God, before we become
slaves of those who blaspheme You and threaten our lives.
With Your cross cut down those who make war against us; let
them know how strong is the faith of those who profess the
truth. Grant this through the prayers of the Theotokos, for You
alone are the Lover of Mankind.
Glory:
O Teacher of wisdom, O Bestower of understanding, O
Instructor of the ignorant and Protector of the poor, strengthen
187

and teach my heart, O Master. O Word of the Father, give me
the word, and do not prevent my mouth from calling out to
You: I have fallen; have mercy on me, O merciful One.
Now and ever:
Let us with our hearts and lips unceasingly extol the
most glorious Mother of God, holier than the holy angels,
and proclaim that she is truly the Theotokos, for she has truly
given birth to God in the flesh and never ceases to intercede
for our souls.
_________________________________________________
But on Sunday we say the Hypakoj of the current tone.
Lord, have mercy. 40.
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
188

Order of the First Hour

More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us and have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
_________________________________________________
And if it is the Forty Day Fast, we make three great
prostrations, saying the prayer:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit
of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
189

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And again, this prayer a final time:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen. And one great prostration.
Then, Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Lord,
have mercy. 12.
_________________________________________________
And the prayer:
O Christ the True Light, Who enlighten and sanctify
everyone who comes into the world, mark us with the light of
Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable light.
Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments,
through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your
saints. Amen.
The priest:
Glory to You, O Christ God, our hope, glory to You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three
times. Give the blessing.
The priest says the little dismissal:
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; of our venerable
and God-bearing fathers; and through the prayers of all the
saints; for Christ is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

190

ORDER OF THE THIRD HOUR
The priest:
Blessed is our God, always, now and ever and forever.
And we: Amen.
Glory to You, our God, glory to You!
Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, eerywhere
present and filling all things, Treasury of Blessings and Giver
of Life, come and dwell within us, cleanse us of all stain, and
save our souls, O gracious One.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us. Three times.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
Most holy Trinity, have mercy on us; Lord, cleanse us of
our sins; Master, forgive our transgressions; Holy One, come
to us and heal our infirmities for Your Name’s sake.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
191

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
Then, Lord, have mercy. 12.
Glory: now and ever:
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.
Then, the psalms:

Psalm 16
Lord, hear a cause that is just,
pay heed to my cry.
Turn Your ear to my prayer;
no deceit is on my lips.
From You may my judgment come forth.
Your eyes discern the truth.
You search my heart, You visit me by night.
You test me and You find in me no wrong.
My words are not sinful as are men’s words.
I kept from violence because of Your word,
I kept my feet firmly in Your paths;
there was no faltering in my steps.

192

Order of the Third Hour

I am here and I call, You will hear me, O God.
Turn Your ear to me; hear my words.
Display Your great love, You Whose right hand saves
Your friends from those who rebel against them.
Guard me as the apple of Your eye.
Hide me in the shadow of Your wings
from the violent attack of the wicked.
My foes encircle me with deadly intent.
Their hearts tight shut, their mouths speak proudly.
They advance against me, and now they surround me.
Their eyes are watching to strike me to the ground
as though they were lions ready to claw
or like some young lion crouched in hiding.
Lord, arise, confront them, strike them down!
Let Your sword rescue my soul from the wicked;
let Your hand, O Lord, rescue me from men,
from men whose reward is in this present life.
You give them their fill of Your treasures;
they rejoice in abundance of offspring
and leave their wealth to their children.
As for me, in my justice I shall see Your face
and be filled, when I awake, with the sight of Your glory.

193

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 24
To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul.
I trust You, let me not be disappointed,
do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,
but only those who wantonly break faith.
Lord, make me know Your ways.
Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,
for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long
because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,
and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.
In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.
He shows the path to those who stray,
He guides the humble in the right path;
He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love
for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name
forgive my guilt, for it is great.
If anyone fears the Lord
He will show him the path he should choose.
His soul shall live in happiness
194

Order of the Third Hour

and his children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;
to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,
for He rescues my feet from the snare.
Turn to me and have mercy
for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart
and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil
and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,
how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me.
Do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me,
for my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God, from all its distress.

Psalm 50
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.
My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
195

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge
O see, in guilt I was born,
a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom
O sprinkle me with hyssop, then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervour sustain me,
that I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,
burnt offering from me You would refuse,
196

Order of the Third Hour

my sacrifice, a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, O God, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion;
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
(burnt offerings wholly consumed),
then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times. Three bows.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
And if, indeed, God the Lord is sung, say: Glory, the
troparion of the day, or of the feast, or of the saint.
Now and ever:
O Theotokos, you are the True Vine who gave birth to the
Fruit of Life: wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede
together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain
mercy for our souls.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung],
say these troparia,
Tone 6:
O Lord, You sent down Your All-Holy Spirit on Your
apostles at the third hour. Do not take Him from us, O Good
One, but renew Him in us who pray to You. [Psalm 50: 13,12]
197

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Verse 1: A pure heart create for me, O God, put a steadfast
spirit within me. [Psalm 50: 12]
Verse 2: Do not cast me away from Your presence, nor
deprive me of Your Holy Spirit. [Psalm 50:13]
To each of these verses we sing in response:
At the third hour: the entire troparion to the end, and a
prostration after each one.
Then, Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, you are the True Vine: and the rest.
_________________________________________________
[Psalm 67:20-21]
Blessed be the Lord God! May the Lord be blessed day
after day. He bears our burdens, God our Savior. This God of
ours is a God Who saves.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father:
The priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
The kontakion of the day, or of the saint, or of the feast.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is the Fast, or if there is no kontakion, we
say these troparia, Tone 8:
Blessed are You, O Christ our God. You have shown the
fishermen to be all-wise, sending down upon them the Holy
Spirit. Through them You have caught the whole world in
Your net. O Lover of Mankind, glory to You!
198

Order of the Third Hour

Glory:
When the Most High descended and confused tongues,
He scattered nations. When He distributed the tongues of fire,
He called all to unity. We also, with one voice, glorify the
Most Holy Spirit.
Now and ever:
All-pure Theotokos, you are the hope, protection, and
refuge of Christians; the unassailable wall, the untroubled
harbor for the storm-tossed; but as you save the world by your
unceasing intercession, remember us also, all-praised Virgin.
_________________________________________________
Lord, have mercy. 40.
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
199

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
_________________________________________________
And if it is the Forty Day Fast, we make three great
prostrations, saying the prayer:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit of
indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
And again, this prayer a final time:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen.
200

Order of the Third Hour

And one great prostration.
Then, Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Lord,
have mercy. 12.
_________________________________________________
After that, this prayer:
[Prayer to the Holy Trinity by Saint Mardarius]
O God, Master, Almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord
Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, One God, One Power,
have mercy on me a sinner and save me, Your unworthy
servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are
blessed forever and ever. Amen.

201

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

202

ORDER OF THE SIXTH HOUR
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 53
O God, save me by Your name;
by Your power uphold my cause.
O God, hear my prayer;
listen to the words of my mouth.
For proud men have risen against me,
ruthless men seek my life.
They have no regard for God.
But I have God for my help.
The Lord upholds my life.
Let the evil recoil upon my foes;
You Who are faithful destroy them.
I will sacrifice to You with willing heart
and praise Your name for it is good;
for You have rescued me from all distress
and my eyes have seen the downfall of my foes.
203

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 54
O God, listen to my prayer,
do not hide from my pleading,
attend to me and reply;
with my cares I cannot rest.
I tremble at the shouts of the foe,
at the cries of the wicked;
for they bring down evil upon me.
They assail me with fury.
My heart is stricken within me,
death’s terror is on me,
trembling and fear fall upon me
and horror overwhelms me.
O that I had wings like a dove
to fly away and be at rest.
So I would escape far away
and take refuge in the desert.
I would hasten to find a shelter
from the raging wind,
from the destructive storm, O Lord,
and from their plotting tongues.
For I can see nothing but violence
and strife in the city.
Night and day they patrol
high on the city walls.

204

Order of the Sixth Hour

It is full of wickedness and evil;
it is full of sin.
Its streets are never free
from tyranny and deceit.
If this had been done by an enemy
I could bear his taunts.
If a rival had risen against me,
I could hide from him.
But it is You, my own companion,
my intimate friend!
(How close was the friendship between us)
We walked together in harmony
in the house of God.
May death fall suddenly upon them!
Let them go to Hades alive,
for wickedness dwells in their homes
and deep in their hearts.
As for me, I will cry to God
and the Lord will save me.
Evening, morning, and at noon
I will cry and lament.
He will deliver my soul in peace
in the attack against me:
for those who fight me are many,
but He hears my voice.

205

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

God will hear and will humble them,
the eternal judge:
for they will not amend their ways.
They have no fear of God.
The traitor has turned against his friends;
he has broken his word.
His speech is softer than butter,
but war is in his heart.
His words are smoother than oil,
but they are naked swords.
Entrust your cares to the Lord
and He will support you.
He will never allow
the just man to stumble.
But You, O God, will bring them down
to the pit of death.
Deceitful and bloodthirsty men
shall not live half their days.
O Lord, I will trust in You.

Psalm 90
He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High
and abides in the shade of the Almighty
says to the Lord: ‘My refuge,
my stronghold, my God in Whom I trust!’

206

Order of the Sixth Hour

It is He Who will free you from the snare
of the fowler who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions
and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night
nor the arrow that flies by day,
nor the plague that prowls in the darkness
nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side,
ten thousand at your right,
you, it will never approach;
His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look
to see how the wicked are repaid,
you who have said: ‘Lord, my refuge!’
and have made the Most High your dwelling.
Upon you no evil shall fall,
no plague approach where you dwell.
For you has He commanded His angels,
to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands
lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread
and trample the young lion and the dragon.

207

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Since he clings to me in love, I will free him;
protect him for he knows My name.
When he calls I shall answer: ‘I am with you.’
I will save him from distress and give him glory.
With length of days I will content him;
I shall let him see My saving power.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times. Three bows.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
And if, indeed, God the Lord is sung, we say: Glory, the
troparion of the day, or of the feast, or of the saint.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our
many sins, O Virgin Theotokos, intercede for us with the One
Who was born of you, for a mother’s prayer is a powerful
means for obtaining the Master’s favor. You are most worthy
of veneration, so do not turn away from the pleading of us
sinners; for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our
sake is full of mercy, and His power is sufficient to save us.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung] we say
the appointed troparion in Tone 2:
On the sixth day and at the sixth hour You nailed to the
cross the sin that Adam dared to commit in Paradise. Also tear
208

Order of the Sixth Hour

up the written charges of our transgressions, O Christ God,
and save us.
Verse 1: O God, listen to my prayer, do not hide from my
pleading. [Psalm 54:2]
Verse 2: I will cry to God, and the Lord will save me.
[Psalm 54:17]
To each of these verses we sing in response: O Lord, on
the sixth day: the entire troparion to the end, and a prostration
after each one.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Since we have no one:
If it is the Forty Day Fast, the troparion of the prophecy,
the prokeimenon, and the paremia are read here.
_________________________________________________
[Psalm 78:8-9]
May Your compassion quickly come to us, for we are
brought very low. Help us, O God, our Savior, because of the
glory of Your Name. Deliver us, O Lord, and cleanse our sins
for Your Name’s sake.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After: Our Father:
The priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
The kontakion of the day, or of the feast,
or of the saint.

209

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

_________________________________________________
However, if it is the Fast, or if there is no kontakion, we
say these troparia, Tone 2:
O Christ God, You brought about salvation in the middle
of the earth. You stretched out Your all-pure hands on the cross
in order to gather together all the nations, who cry aloud: O
Lord, glory to You!
Glory:
We bow before Your sacred image, O gracious Lord, and
beg forgiveness for our offenses, O Christ our God; for You,
of Your own good will, ascended the cross in Your human
nature to deliver from the enemy’s bondage those whom You
created. Therefore we gratefully cry out to You: By Your
coming to save the world, O Savior, You have filled all with
joy.
Now and ever:
Theotokos, fount of mercy, deem us worthy of compassion.
Look upon a sinful people and as always show your power;
for, placing our trust in you, we cry out to you “Rejoice,” as
once did Gabriel, the commander of angels.
This is said on Monday, on Tuesday, and on Thursday.
But on Wednesday and Friday, instead of: Theotokos,
fount of mercy: this is said:

210

Order of the Sixth Hour

Stavrotheotokion, Tone 2:
You are most-glorious, O Virgin Theotokos, and we sing
to you: for through the cross of your Son, Hades and death
were put to death, and those who were dead rose up and were
made worthy of life, receiving paradise, the ancient delight.
Therefore, giving thanks, we glorify the powerful Christ our
God, and only all-merciful One.
_________________________________________________
Lord, have mercy. 40.
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
211

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
_________________________________________________
And if it is the Fast and Alleluia was sung, we make three
great prostrations, saying the prayer:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit of
indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
And again, this prayer a final time:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen. And one great prostration.
Then, Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Lord,
have mercy. 12.
_________________________________________________
212

Order of the Sixth Hour

After that, this prayer:
[Prayer to God the Father
by Saint Basil the Great]
God and Lord of Powers and Maker of all creation,
through Your compassion beyond our understanding, You
sent down Your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
for the salvation of our race. Through His honorable cross
He tore apart the written list of our sins and triumphed
over the powers and masters of darkness. Now, O Master
Who love mankind, accept from us sinners these prayers of
thanksgiving and petition, and preserve us from any deadly
fall in the darkness and against every visible and invisible
enemy who may seek our harm. Pierce our bodies with fear
of You, and let not our souls fall into evil words or thoughts,
but, instead, wound them with love for You so that, looking
upon You at all times and guided by the light that emanates
from You, we may contemplate the unapproachable eternal
light. May we ever address our profession and thanksgiving to
You, O eternal Father, with Your only-begotten Son, and Your
all-holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and
forever. Amen.
And if, indeed, God the Lord: is sung, we say the Typical
Psalms here.
However, if Alleluia, say it after the Ninth Hour.
But, when the Ninth Hour follows the Sixth it is begun
like this: Holy God: After Our Father: Lord, have mercy, 12.
Glory: now and ever: Come, let us worship: Three times. And
the psalms, and the rest.
213

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

214

ORDER OF THE NINTH HOUR
After Blessed is our God:
Glory to You, our God, glory to You! Heavenly King:
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father:
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Glory: now and ever:
Come, let us worship: Three times.
Then, the psalms:

Psalm 83
How lovely is Your dwelling place,
Lord, God of hosts.
My soul is longing and yearning,
is yearning for the courts of the Lord.
My heart and my soul ring out their joy
to God, the living God.
The sparrow herself finds a home
and the swallow a nest for her brood;
she lays her young by Your altars,
Lord of hosts, my king and my God.
215

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

They are happy who dwell in Your house,
for ever singing Your praise.
They are happy, whose strength is in You,
in whose hearts are the roads to Zion.
As they go through the Bitter Valley
they make it a place of springs
(The autumn rain covers it with blessings).
They walk with ever growing strength,
they will see the God of gods in Zion.
O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer,
give ear, O God of Jacob.
Turn Your eyes, O God, our shield,
look on the face of Your anointed.
One day within Your courts
is better than a thousand elsewhere.
The threshold of the house of God
I prefer to the dwellings of the wicked.
For the Lord God is a rampart, a shield;
He will give us His favor and glory.
The Lord will not refuse any good
to those who walk without blame.
Lord, God of hosts,
happy the man who trusts in You!

216

Order of the Ninth Hour

Psalm 84
O Lord, You once favored Your land
and revived the fortunes of Jacob,
You forgave the guilt of Your people
and covered all their sins.
You averted all Your rage,
You calmed the heat of Your anger.
Revive us now, God, our helper!
Put an end to Your grievance against us.
Will You be angry with us for ever,
will Your anger never cease?
Will You not restore again our life
that Your people may rejoice in You?
Let us see, O Lord, Your mercy
and give us Your saving help.
I will hear what the Lord God has to say,
a voice that speaks of peace,
peace for His people and His friends
and those who turn to Him in their hearts.
His help is near for those who fear Him
and His glory will dwell in our land.
Mercy and faithfulness have met;
justice and peace have embraced.
faithfulness shall spring from the earth
and justice look down from heaven.

217

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Lord will make us prosper
and our earth shall yield its fruit.
Justice shall march before Him
and peace shall follow His steps.

Psalm 85
Turn Your ear, O Lord, and give answer
for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my life, for I am faithful;
save the servant who trusts in You.
You are my God, have mercy on me, Lord,
for I cry to You all the day long.
Give joy to Your servant, O Lord,
for to You I lift up my soul.
O Lord, You are good and forgiving,
full of love to all who call.
Give heed, O Lord, to my prayer
and attend to the sound of my voice.
In the day of distress I will call
and surely You will reply.
Among the gods there is none like You, O Lord,
nor work to compare with Yours.
All the nations shall come to adore You
and glorify Your name, O Lord,
for You are great and do marvelous deeds,
You Who alone are God.

218

Order of the Ninth Hour

Show me, Lord, Your way
so that I may walk in Your truth.
Guide my heart to fear Your name.
I will praise You, Lord my God, with all my heart
and glorify Your name for ever;
for Your love to me has been great.
You have saved me from the depths of the grave.
The proud have risen against me;
ruthless men seek my life,
to You they pay no heed.
But You, God of mercy and compassion,
slow to anger, O Lord,
abounding in love and truth,
turn and take pity on me.
O give Your strength to Your servant
and save Your handmaid’s son.
Show me a sign of Your favor
that my foes may see to their shame
that You console me and give me Your help.
And again:
Show me a sign of Your favor
that my foes may see to their shame
that You console me and give me Your help.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times. Three bows.
219

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Lord, have mercy. Three times.
And if, indeed, God the Lord is sung, say: Glory, the
troparion of the day, or of the feast, or of the saint.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
For our sake You were born of the Virgin, and You
suffered crucifixion, O Good One. You conquered death by
death, and through Your resurrection You revealed Yourself as
God. Do not disdain those whom You have created with Your
own hands, but show forth Your love for mankind, O Merciful
One. Accept the intercession which the Theotokos makes in
our behalf. O our Savior, save a despairing people.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is [a period when] Alleluia [is sung], this
appointed troparion, in Tone 8:
O Christ God, Who at the ninth hour tasted death in the
flesh for our sakes, slay the desires of the flesh and save us.
Verse 1: Lord, let my cry come before You: teach me by
Your word. [Psalm 118:169]
Verse 2: Let my pleading come before You: save me by
Your promise. [Psalm 118:170]
To each of these verses we sing in response: O Christ
God, Who at the ninth hour: the entire troparion to the end,
and a prostration after each one.

220

Order of the Ninth Hour

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
For our sake:
_________________________________________________
[Daniel 3:34-35]
For Your Name’s sake, do not deliver us up forever, or
make void Your covenant. Do not take away Your mercy from
us, for the sake of Abraham Your beloved, Isaac Your servant,
and Israel Your holy one.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father: the
kontakion of the day, the feast, or the saint.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is the Fast, we say these, Tone 8:
Seeing the Author of life hanging on the cross, the Good
Thief cried out with his act of faith. If the One crucified with
us were not God in the flesh, the sun would not have hidden
its rays, nor would the earth have trembled with fear. And
You patiently bear all this; remember me, O Lord, in Your
kingdom.
Glory:
Between two thieves Your cross became the scales of
justice, for one was dragged down to hell by the weight of his
blasphemy, but the other, lightened of his faults, was raised to
the knowledge of the things of God. O Christ God, glory to
You.
Now and ever:
221

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Seeing the Lamb and Shepherd and Savior of the world
on the cross, she who bore Him said weeping: The world
rejoices, for it receives redemption; but my inner being burns
as I see Your crucifixion which You endured for all, O my Son
and my God.
_________________________________________________
Lord, have mercy. 40.
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.

222

Order of the Ninth Hour

The priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us and have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
_________________________________________________
And if it is the Fast and Alleluia was sung, we make three
great prostrations, saying the prayer:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit of
indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
And again, this prayer a final time:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen. And one great prostration.

223

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Lord,
have mercy. 12.
_________________________________________________
After that, this prayer of Saint Basil the Great:
O Master Lord Jesus Christ our God, You patiently
endured our sins and led us to this hour at which You were
hung upon the life-giving wood. You opened a way to
paradise for the penitent thief and crushed death by Your
death. Now forgive the trespasses that we Your servants have
committed, unworthy sinners that we are. We have sinned
indeed and transgressed Your law. We are unworthy even to
lift up our eyes to heaven, for we have abandoned the path of
Your holiness and pursued the desires of our hearts. But now
we implore Your immense goodness: spare us, O Lord, in the
multitude of Your mercies; save us for the sake of Your most
holy Name. Our days were spent in vanity; rescue us from the
hands of our enemy, and forgive our sins. Subdue in us the
cravings of our flesh, so that, after putting off the old self, we
may put on the new and live for You, our Lord and benefactor;
and that, obeying Your commandments, we may reach eternal
repose in the place where all the blessed abide, for You are the
true joy and delight of those who love You, O Christ our God.
We send up glory to You, and to Your eternal Father, and to
Your all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and
forever. Amen.
Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Give the blessing. And the dismissal.

224

ORDER OF THE MIDDAY SERVICE
[The Order of the Midday Service] is said thus:
Bless the Lord, O my soul. Blessed are You, O Lord.

Psalm 102
Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and all my being bless His holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all His blessings.
It is He Who forgives all your guilt
Who heals every one of your ills,
Who redeems your life from the grave,
Who crowns you with love and compassion,
Who fills your life with good things
renewing your youth like an eagle’s.
The Lord secures justice
and the rights of all the oppressed.
He made known His ways to Moses,
and His deeds to Israel’s sons.
225

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Lord is compassion and love,
slow to anger and rich in mercy.
His wrath will come to an end;
He will not be angry forever.
He does not treat us according to our sins
nor repay us according to our faults.
For as the heavens are high above the earth,
so strong is His love for those who fear Him.
As far as the east is from the west,
so far does He remove our sins.
As a father has compassion on His sons,
the Lord has pity on those who fear Him.
For He knows of what we are made,
He remembers that we are dust.
As for man, his days are like grass;
he flowers like the flower of the field;
The wind blows and he is gone
and his place never sees him again.
But the kindness of the Lord is everlasting
upon those who hold Him in fear;
His justice reaches out to children’s children
when they keep His covenant in truth,
when they remember His commands and do them.
226

Order of the Midday Service

The Lord has set His throne in heaven,
and His Kingdom is ruling over all.
Bless the Lord, all His angels,
mighty in power, fulfilling His word,
who heed the voice of His word.
Bless the Lord, all His hosts,
His servants, who do His will.
Bless the Lord, all His works,
in every place where He rules.
Glory: now and ever:
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all my being bless His
holy name. Blessed are You, O Lord.
Glory:

Psalm 145
Praise the Lord, O my soul.
I will praise the Lord all my life,
I will make music to my God while I live.
Put no trust in princes,
In mortal men, in whom there is no help.
Take their breath, they return to clay
and their plans that day come to nothing.

227

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

He is happy who is helped by Jacob’s God,
whose hope is in the Lord his God.
Who alone made heaven and earth,
The seas and all they contain.
It is the Lord Who keeps faith forever,
Who is just to those who are oppressed,
It is He Who gives bread to the hungry.
The Lord Who sets prisoners free;
The Lord Who gives sight to the blind,
Who raises up those who are bowed down,
The Lord Who protects the stranger
and upholds the widow and orphan.
It is the Lord Who loves the just
but thwarts the path of the wicked.
The Lord shall reign forever;
Zion’s God from age to age.
Now and ever:
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who, being
immortal, deigned for our salvation to become incarnate of
the holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and became man
without change; You were also crucified, O Christ our God,
and by death have trampled Death, being One of the Holy
Trinity, glorified with the Father and the Holy Spirit, save us.

228

Order of the Midday Service

________________________________________________
It is necessary to be aware that during the Great Forty
Day Fast we do not say the typical psalms, but after the prayer
of the Ninth Hour: O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God: we
begin to sing: In Your kingdom: singing after each verse:
Remember us, O Lord, when You come in Your kingdom.
And then, after Glory: and after Now and ever: one
prostration is made after each Remember.
But at the conclusion of the verses the two choirs unite
and sing with sweet melody:
Remember us, O Lord: 3. And one prostration at each one.
_________________________________________________
Remember us, O Lord, when You come in Your kingdom.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.
Blessed are they who mourn, for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the land.
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
for they will be satisfied.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
Blessed are the pure of heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called
children of God.
Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of
righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

229

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you
and utter every kind of evil against you falsely because of Me.
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward will be great in
heaven.
At the Beatitudes these verses on all days,
Tone 6:
Remember me, O God, my Savior, when You come in
Your kingdom, and save me for You alone love mankind.
You accepted Peter’s weeping, O Christ, accept also my
repentance, and give me forgiveness of transgressions.
You preached repentance to all, O Baptist and Forerunner
of the Lord, I pray you make me worthy to repent in spirit.
Having passed over the waves of affliction, O Saints,
you were saved in the storms of weakness; therefore you are
blessed.
Glory:
O my Savior, rightly praised by the prophets as one of
the Trinity without confusion, through the prayers of the
Forerunner, save me.
Now and ever:
Powerful protectress, protect me from the assault of life’s
passions, for I am in affliction, O Lady.

230

Order of the Midday Service

Apostolic reading to the Colossians, pericope 258
[3:12-16]
Brothers [and sisters]: Put on then, as God’s chosen
ones, holy and beloved, compassion, kindness, lowliness,
meekness, and patience, forbearing one another and, if one
has a complaint against another, forgiving each other; as
the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive. And
above all these put on love, which binds everything together
in perfect harmony. And let the peace of Christ rule in your
hearts, to which indeed you were called in the one body. And
be thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teach
and admonish one another in all wisdom, and sing psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs with thankfulness in your hearts to
God.
Gospel according to Mark, pericope 37
[8:34b-9:1]
The Lord said: “If any man would come after me, let him
deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me. For whoever
would save his life will lose it; and whoever loses his life for
My sake and the gospel’s will save it. For what does it profit a
man, to gain the whole world and forfeit his life? For what can
a man give in return for his life? For whoever is ashamed of
Me and of My words in this adulterous and sinful generation,
of him will the Son of man also be ashamed, when He comes
in the glory of His Father with the holy angels.” And he said to
them, “Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who
will not taste death before they see that the kingdom of God
has come with power.”

231

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

________________________________________________
And if, indeed, it is the Forty Day Fast, the two choirs
uniting, sing with sweet melody: Remember us, O Lord:
and one prostration at each repetition. However, if it is not,
quickly:
_________________________________________________
Glory: now and ever:
Remember us, O Lord, when You come in Your kingdom.
Remember us, O Master, when You come in Your
kingdom.
Remember us, O Holy One, when You come in Your
kingdom.
The heavenly choir praises You and says: Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of hosts; heaven and earth are filled with Your
glory.
Verse: Look toward Him and be radiant; let your faces not
be abashed. [Psalm 33:2]
The heavenly choir praises You and says: Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of hosts; heaven and earth are filled with Your
glory.
Glory:
The choir of the holy angels and archangels with all the
heavenly powers praises You and says: Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of hosts, heaven and earth are filled with Your glory.
Now and ever:

232

Order of the Midday Service

[The Symbol of Faith]
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator of
heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, the only-begotten, born
of the Father before all ages. Light from light, true God from
true God, begotten, not made, one in essence with the Father;
through Whom all things were made. For us men and for our
salvation, He came down from heaven, and was incarnate from
the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man. He was
crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was
buried. He rose on the third day according to the scriptures.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; and He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. And in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of Life, Who proceeds from the
Father. Together with the Father and the Son He is worshiped
and glorified; He spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I profess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead and the
life of the world to come. Amen.
Remit, pardon and forgive our transgressions voluntary
and involuntary, in word and in deed, with knowledge and
in ignorance, in thought and in desire, by night and by day,
forgive them all, O God, for You are good and love mankind.
Our Father: Then the Kontakion of the feast.
If it is not a feast, then [the kontakion] of the church, the
day, and the saint.
Glory: With the saints, O Christ, give rest:
233

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Steadfast protectress: or [the kontakion of
the feast] of the church of the Theotokos.
On Monday: the Kontakion of the Holy Angels,
Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.
On Tuesday: the Kontakion of the Forerunner, Tone 3:
Today she who once was barren gives birth to Christ’s
Forerunner. He himself is the fulfillment of all prophecy; for
in the Jordan, he imposed his hand upon the Word of God
Whom the prophets had foretold and was shown to be His
prophet, herald, and Forerunner.
On Wednesday and on Friday this, in Tone 4:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.
On Thursday: of the Holy Apostles,
Tone 2:
Lord, You have received Your steadfast and inspired
preachers, the foremost of Your apostles, into the enjoyment
of Your good gifts and repose. You preferred their sufferings
and death above any sacrifice. For You alone know the secrets
of the heart.
234

Order of the Midday Service

On the same day: of Saint Nicholas, Tone 3:
According to: Today the Virgin:
)
(D’iva dnes’:  
You were renowned as a priest in Myra, O holy Nicholas;
for you fulfilled the Gospel of Christ, O venerable Father. You
risked your life for your people and saved the innocent from
death. Thereby you have been initiated into the mysteries of
God’s grace.
On Saturday, when we say: Glory:
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants, where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
Now and ever: the appointed Kontakion of the Saints,
Tone 8:
To You, O Lord, Gardener of all creation, the world offers
the God-bearing martyrs as the first fruits of nature. Through
their prayers and through the Theotokos preserve Your Church,
Your dwelling-place, in perfect peace, O most merciful One.
But this is said each day except Saturday:
Steadfast Protectress of Christians, unshakable Mediatrix
before the Creator, do not despise the prayerful voices of
sinners; but in your goodness hurry to assist those who
faithfully cry out to you. Hasten to intercede and heed our
supplication, interceding always, Theotokos, in behalf of
those who honor you.
_________________________________________________
235

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And if is the Forty Day Fast: Lord, have mercy, 40.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
Priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us and have mercy on us.
And the typical sixteen prostrations with the Prayer of
Saint Ephrem: see page 223. And after this, the principal
celebrant begins Vespers: Come, let us worship: three times.
And the psalm: Bless the Lord, my soul:
At the end of Vespers, if it is not Presanctified, after the
prayer: O Heavenly King: we say the Prayer of Saint Ephrem.
Then, Trisagion, Our Father: Lord, have mercy, 12, and after
that, this prayer:
All-holy Trinity, Consubstantial Power:
Then, Blessed be the Name of the Lord: three times, with
three bows. And Psalm 33: I will bless the Lord at all times:
Glory: now and ever: and the dismissal.
If it is the Liturgy, after the Prayer behind the Ambon,
Blessed be the Name of the Lord: three bows, the psalm: I will
bless the Lord at all times: and the dismissal.
236

Order of the Midday Service

If Vespers, without Presanctified, does not follow
immediately the Typical Psalms, after the sixteen bows,
Trisagion: Most holy Trinity: Our Father: For Thine is the
kingdom: Lord, have mercy, 12, the prayer O most holy
Trinity: and the small dismissal.
_________________________________________________
If it is not the Forty Day Fast, after the kontakion:
Lord, have mercy, 12. And the prayer:
All-Holy Trinity, Consubstantial Power, Indivisible
Kingdom, Cause of all good things, look favorably upon me,
a sinner, at this present hour. Take away all the defilement of
my mind and enlighten my understanding that I may always
praise, glorify, and say: One is holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ,
to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, now and forever. Three
times.

Then, Psalm 33
I will bless the Lord at all times,
His praise always on my lips;
my soul shall make its boast.
The humble shall hear and be glad.
Glorify the Lord with me.
Together let us praise His name.
I sought the Lord and He answered me;
from all my terrors He set me free.
237

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Look toward Him and be radiant;
let your faces not be abashed.
The poor man called, the Lord heard him
and rescued him from all his distress.
The angel of the Lord is encamped
around those who revere Him, to resolve them.
Taste and see that the Lord is good.
He is happy who seeks refuge in Him.
Revere the Lord, you His saints;
they lack nothing, those who revere Him.
Strong lions suffer want and go hungry
but those who seek the Lord lack no blessing.
Come, children, and hear me,
that I may teach you the fear of the Lord.
Who is he who longs for life and many days,
to enjoy his prosperity?
Then keep your tongue from evil
and your lips from speaking deceit.
Turn aside from evil and do good,
and strive after peace.
The Lord turns His face against the wicked
to destroy their remembrance from the earth.
The Lord turns His eyes to the just
and His ears to their appeal.

238

Order of the Midday Service

The just cried out and the Lord heard them,
and those who are crushed in spirit He saves.
Many are the trials of the just,
but from them all the Lord will rescue them.
He will keep guard over all their bones,
not one of their bones shall be broken.
Evil brings death to the wicked,
those who hate the good are doomed.
The Lord ransoms the souls of His servants,
those who hide in Him shall not be condemned.
Then:
It is truly proper to glorify you, O Theotokos, the everblessed, immaculate, and the mother of our God. More
honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to God
the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Glory: now and ever: and the dismissal.

239

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

240

ORDER OF VESPERS
After Blessed is our God: we say:
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 103
Bless the Lord, O my soul!
Lord my God, how great You are,
clothed in majesty and glory,
wrapped in light as in a robe!
You stretch out the heavens like a tent.
Above the rains You build Your dwelling.
You make the clouds Your chariot,
You walk on the wings of the wind;
You make Your angels spirits
and Your ministers a flaming fire.
You founded the earth on its base,
to stand firm from age to age.
You wrapped it with the ocean like a cloak;
the waters stood higher than the mountains.
241

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

At Your threat they took to flight;
at the voice of Your thunder they fled.
They rose over the mountains and flowed down
to the place which You had appointed.
You set limits they might not pass
lest they return to cover the earth.
You make springs gush forth in the valleys;
they flow in between the hills.
They give drink to all the beasts of the field;
the wild-asses quench their thirst.
On their banks dwell the birds of heaven;
from the branches they sing their song.
From Your dwelling You water the hills;
earth drinks its fill of Your gift.
You make the grass grow for the cattle
and the plants to serve man’s needs,
that he may bring forth bread from the earth
and wine to cheer man’s heart;
oil, to make his face shine
and bread to strengthen man’s heart.
The trees of the Lord drink their fill,
the cedars He planted on Lebanon;
there the birds build their nests;
on the tree-top the stork has her home.
The goats find a home on the mountains
and rabbits hide in the rocks.
You made the moon to mark the months;
the sun knows the time for its setting.
242

Order of Vespers

When You spread the darkness it is night
and all the beasts of the forest creep forth.
The young lions roar for their prey
and ask their food from God.
At the rising of the sun they steal away
and go to rest in their dens.
Man goes out to his work,
to labor till evening falls.
How many are Your works, O Lord!
In wisdom You have made them all;
the earth is full of Your riches.
There is the sea, vast and wide,
with its moving swarms past counting,
living things great and small.
The ships are moving there
and the monsters You made to play with.
All of these look to You
to give them their food in due season.
You give it, they gather it up;
You open Your hand, they have their fill.
You hide Your face, they are dismayed;
You take back Your spirit, they die,
returning to the dust from which they came.
You send forth Your spirit, they are created;
and You renew the face of the earth.
May the glory of the Lord last forever!
May the Lord rejoice in His works!
243

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

He looks on the earth and it trembles;
the mountains send forth smoke at His touch.
I will sing to the Lord all my life,
make music to my God while I live.
May my thoughts be pleasing to Him.
I find my joy in the Lord.
Let sinners vanish from the earth
and the wicked exist no more.
Bless the Lord, O my soul!
The sun knows the time for its setting.
When You spread the darkness it is night.
How many are Your works, O Lord!
In wisdom You have made them all.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
But the priest reads the Prayers of Light.

The First Prayer
Lord, compassionate and merciful, long-suffering and
rich in mercy, give ear to my prayer and attend to the sound of
my plea. Show us a sign of Your favor; guide us in Your way
so that we may walk in Your truth. Gladden our hearts that we
may fear Your holy Name, for You are great and do marvelous
deeds. You alone are God, and among the gods there is none
like You, O Lord. Powerful in mercy and gracious in strength,
You help, comfort, and save all those who hope in Your holy
Name.
244

Order of Vespers

For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor, and worship, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Second Prayer
Lord, do not rebuke us in Your anger, nor punish us in
Your wrath. Deal with us according to Your kindness, O
Physician and Healer of our souls. Guide us to the harbor of
Your will; enlighten the eyes of our minds that we may know
Your truth. Grant that we may spend what remains of this day
and the rest of our life peacefully and sinlessly through the
intercession of the holy Theotokos and of all the saints.
For Yours is the might; and Yours are the kingdom and the
power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever. Amen.

The Third Prayer
Lord our God, remember us Your sinful and useless
servants as we call upon Your holy and sublime Name, and
do not put us to shame for hoping in Your mercy. Grant us
instead, O Lord, all our petitions which lead to salvation, and
make us worthy to love and to fear You with all our hearts and
to do Your will in everything.
For You are a good and loving God, and we give glory to
You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Amen.

The Fourth Prayer
You are praised by the holy powers with hymns that are
never silent and in doxologies that never cease. Fill our mouth
with Your praise that we may ascribe majesty to Your holy
Name. Through the intercession of the holy Theotokos and
245

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

of all the saints, give us a share and an inheritance with those
who fear You in truth and who keep Your commandments.
For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor, and worship, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Fifth Prayer
Blessed are You, Lord God almighty. You know the human
mind, You know our needs long before we ask or recognize
them. Therefore, O loving King, good in every way, allow us
in Your great mercy to call upon Your holy Name with a clear
conscience, and lead us not into temptation but deliver us
from the evil one , and in Your providence, arrange everything
for our good.
For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor and worship, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Sixth Prayer
Lord, O Lord, You hold all things in Your spotless hand;
You are long-suffering toward all of us, and You repent over
our evil deeds. Remember Your mercy and Your compassion.
Visit us in Your goodness and for the rest of this day enable us
to flee from the many wiles of the evil one, and keep our life
secure by the grace of Your All-Holy Spirit.
Through the mercy and the loving-kindness of Your onlybegotten Son with Whom You are blessed, together with Your
all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and
forever. Amen.

The Seventh Prayer
Great and wonderful God, You govern all things with
indescribable goodness and rich providence. You have
granted us the good things of this earth, and through the good
246

Order of Vespers

things already bestowed on us, have given us a pledge of the
promised kingdom. You have kept us away from every evil
during the part of this day which has passed, even until the
present moment; now allow us to complete the rest of the
day without blame in the presence of Your holy glory singing
hymns to You, O God, Who alone are good and love us all.
For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Eighth Prayer
Great and most high God, You alone possess immortality
and dwell in unapproachable light. You made all creation
with wisdom, dividing light from darkness, establishing the
sun to rule the day and the moon and stars to rule the night.
You have allowed us sinners to approach Your presence with
thanksgiving in this present hour and to offer You evening
praise. O loving Lord, make our prayer ascend to You like
incense and accept it as a sweet fragrance. Grant that we may
spend the present evening and the coming night in peace;
clothe us with the armor of light; deliver us from the fears of
the night and from everything that lurks about in darkness.
Grant that the sleep You have given us to refresh our fatigue
may be free from all illusions of the devil. Yes, O Master
of All, Giver of good things, let us feel contrition as we lie
on our beds remembering Your Name throughout the night.
Enlightened by meditation on Your commands, may we rise
with gladdened soul to give glory to Your goodness, offering
to Your compassion prayers and supplications for our sins
and those of all Your people. Visit us with mercy through the
intercession of the holy Theotokos.
For You are a good and loving God, and we give glory to
You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Amen.
247

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And upon the completion of the introductory psalm, the
deacon, or the priest, says this ektenia:
In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
After each of the following petitions, the choir sings:
Lord, have mercy.
For peace from on high, and for the salvation of our souls,
let us pray to the Lord.
For peace in the whole world, for the stability of the holy
Churches of God and for the union of all, let us pray to the
Lord.
For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith,
reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.
For our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome, let us pray to
the Lord.
For our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for the venerable
presbyterate, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the
people, let us pray to the Lord.
For our government (or for our God-protected Emperor
or King Name) and for all in the service of our country, let us
pray to the Lord.
For this city (or for this village, or for this holy monastery),
for every city, community, and for the faithful living in them,
let us pray to the Lord.
248

Order of Vespers

For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of
the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.
For those who travel by sea, air, and land, for the sick, the
suffering and the captive, and for their salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.
That we be delivered from all affliction, wrath, and need,
let us pray to the Lord.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
Exclamation:
For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory,
honor, and worship now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Then, the Kathisma.
After the Kathisma, the deacon says the Little Ektenia:
Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
249

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
On Sunday, and if directed by the typicon, sing: Blessed
is the man:
_________________________________________________

THE FIRST KATHISMA
Psalm 1
Blessed is the man who follows not the counsel of the
wicked; nor lingers in the way of sinners nor sits in the
company of scorners, but whose delight is the law of the Lord
and who ponders His law day and night. He is like a tree that
is planted beside the flowing waters, that yields its fruit in
due season and whose leaves shall never fade; and all that he
250

Order of Vespers

does shall prosper. Not so are the wicked, not so! For they like
winnowed chaff shall be driven away by the wind. When the
wicked are judged they shall not stand, nor find room among
those who are just; for the Lord guards the way of the just but
the way of the wicked leads to doom.

Psalm 2
Why this tumult among nations, among peoples this
useless murmuring? They arise, the kings of the earth, princes
plot against the Lord and His Anointed. “Come, let us break
their fetters, come, let us cast off their yoke.” He Who sits
in the heavens laughs; the Lord is laughing them to scorn.
Then He will speak in His anger, His rage will strike them
with terror. “It is I Who have set up my king on Zion, my
holy mountain.” (I will announce the decree of the Lord). The
Lord said to me: “You are my Son. It is I Who have begotten
you this day. Ask and I shall bequeath you the nations, put
the ends of the earth in your possession. With a rod of iron
you will break them, shatter them like a potter’s jar.” Now, O
kings, understand, take warning, rulers of the earth; serve the
Lord with awe and trembling, pay Him your homage lest He
be angry and you perish; for suddenly His anger will blaze.
Blessed are they who put their trust in God.

Psalm 3
How many are my foes, O Lord! How many are rising
up against me! How many are saying about me: “There is
no help for him in God.” But You, Lord, are a shield about
me, my glory, who lift up my head. I cry aloud to the Lord.
He answers from His holy mountain. I lie down to rest and I
sleep. I wake, for the Lord upholds me. I will not fear even
thousands of people who are ranged on every side against me.
251

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Arise, Lord; save me, my God, You Who strike all my foes on
the mouth, You Who break the teeth of the wicked! O Lord of
salvation, bless Your people!
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times.
And after the first antiphon, the Little Ektenia and the
exclamation:
For Yours is the might, and Yours are the kingdom and the
power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

Psalm 4
When I call, answer me, O God of justice; from anguish
You released me, have mercy and hear me! O men, how long
will your hearts be closed, will you love what is futile and
seek what is false? It is the Lord Who grants favors to those
whom He loves; the Lord hears me whenever I call Him.
Fear Him; do not sin; ponder on your bed and be still. Make
justice your sacrifice and trust in the Lord. “What can bring
us happiness?” many say. Lift up the light of Your face on us,
O Lord. You have put into my heart a greater joy than they
have from abundance of corn and new wine. I will lie down
in peace and sleep comes at once for You alone, Lord, make
me dwell in safety.

252

Order of Vespers

Psalm 5
To my words give ear, O Lord, give heed to my groaning.
Attend to the sound of my cries, my King and my God. It is
You Whom I invoke, O Lord. In the morning You hear me;
in the morning I offer You my prayer, watching and waiting.
You are no God Who loves evil; no sinner is Your guest. The
boastful shall not stand their ground before Your face. You
hate all who do evil: You destroy all who lie. The deceitful and
bloodthirsty man the Lord detests. But I through the greatness
of Your love have access to Your house. I bow down before
Your holy temple, filled with awe. Lead me, Lord, in Your
justice, because of those who lie in wait; make clear Your way
before me. No truth can be found in their mouths, their heart
is all mischief, their throat a wide-open grave, all honey their
speech. Declare them guilty, O God. Let them fail in their
designs. Drive them out for their many offenses; for they have
defied You. All those You protect shall be glad and ring out
their joy. You shelter them; in You they rejoice, those who
love Your name. It is You Who bless the just man, Lord: You
surround him with favor as with a shield.

Psalm 6
Lord, do not reprove me in Your anger; punish me not, in
Your rage. Have mercy on me, Lord, I have no strength; Lord,
heal me, my body is racked; my soul is racked with pain. But
You, O Lord…how long? Return, Lord, rescue my soul. Save
me in Your merciful love; for in death no one remembers You;
from the grave, who can give You praise? I am exhausted with
my groaning; every night I drench my pillow with tears; I
bedew my bed with weeping. My eye wastes away with grief;
I have grown old surrounded by my foes. Leave me, all you
253

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

who do evil; for the Lord has heard my weeping. The Lord
has heard my plea; The Lord will accept my prayer. All my
foes will retire in confusion, foiled and suddenly confounded.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times.
After the second antiphon and the ektenia, the exclamation:
For You are a good and loving God, and we give glory to
You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

Psalm 7
Lord God, I take refuge in You. From my pursuer save me
and rescue me, lest he tear me to pieces like a lion and drag
me off with no one to rescue me. Lord God, if my hands have
done wrong, if I have paid back evil for good, I who saved my
unjust oppressor: then let my foe pursue me and seize me, let
him trample my life to the ground and lay my soul in the dust.
Lord, rise up in Your anger, rise against the fury of my foes;
my God, awake! You will give judgment. Let the company
of nations gather round You, taking Your seat above them on
high. (The Lord is judge of all the peoples.) Give judgment
for me, Lord; I am just and innocent of heart. Put an end to
the evil of the wicked! Make the just stand firm, You Who test
the mind and heart, O just God! God is the shield that protects
me, who saves the upright of heart. God is a just judge slow
to anger; but He threatens the wicked every day, men who
will not repent. God will sharpen His sword; He has braced
His bow and taken aim. For them He has prepared deadly
254

Order of Vespers

weapons; He barbs His arrows with fire. Here is one who is
pregnant with malice, conceives evil and brings forth lies. He
digs a pitfall, digs it deep; and in the trap he has made he will
fall. I will thank the Lord for His justice: I will sing to the
Lord, the Most High.

Psalm 8
How great is Your name, O Lord our God, through all
the earth! Your majesty is praised above the heavens; on the
lips of children and of babes You have found praise to foil
Your enemy, to silence the foe and the rebel. When I see the
heavens, the work of Your hands, the moon and the stars
which You arranged, what is man that You should keep him in
mind, mortal man that You care for him? Yet You have made
him little less than a god; with glory and honor You crowned
him, gave him power over the works of Your hand, put all
things under his feet. All of them, sheep and cattle, yes, even
the savage beasts, birds of the air, and fish that make their way
through the waters. How great is Your name, O Lord our God,
through all the earth!
After the third antiphon and the ektenia, the exclamation:
For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
________________________________________________
After the kathisma, the deacon says the Little Ektenia:
Again and again: and the priest says the exclamation:
255

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For Yours are the might, and Yours are the kingdom and
the power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Then, O Lord, I have cried: in the appointed tone.

Psalm 140
O Lord, I have cried to You, hear me.
Versicle: Hear me, O Lord.
O Lord, I have cried to You, hear me; receive the voice of
my prayer when I call upon You.
Hear me, O Lord.
Let my prayer ascend to You like incense; and the lifting
up of my hands like an evening sacrifice.
Hear me, O Lord.
And after the order of verses:
O Lord, set a guard before my mouth and set a seal on the
door of my lips.
Let not my heart be inclined to evil, nor make excuse for
the sins I commit.
Let me never share in sinners’ feasting. If a just man
strikes or reproves me it is kindness,
but let the oil of the wicked not anoint my head. Let my
prayer be ever against their malice.
The princes were thrown down by the side of the rock;
then they understood that my words were kind.
As a millstone is shattered to pieces on the ground, so
their bones were strewn at the mouth of the grave.
256

Order of Vespers

To You, Lord God, my eyes are turned; in You I take
refuge; spare my soul!
From the trap they have laid for me keep me safe; keep
me from the snares of those who do evil.
Let the wicked fall into the traps they have set while I
pursue my way unharmed.

Psalm 141
With all my voice I cry to the Lord, with all my voice I
entreat the Lord.
I pour out my trouble before Him; I tell Him all my
distress while my spirit faints within me.
But You, O Lord, know my path. On the way where I shall
walk they have hidden a snare to entrap me.
Look on my right and see: there is no one who takes my
part.
I have no means of escape, not one who cares for my soul.
I cry to You, O Lord. I have said: “You are my refuge, all
I have in the land of the living.”
Listen, then, to my cry for I am in the depths of distress.
Rescue me from those who pursue me for they are stronger
than I.
Verses to the stichera at O Lord, I have cried:
On 10: Bring my soul out of this prison and then I shall
praise Your Name.
Around me the just will assemble because of Your
goodness to me.

257

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 129
On 8: Out of the depths I cry to You, O Lord; Lord, hear
my voice!
Let Your ears be attentive to the voice of my pleading.
On 6: If You, O Lord, should mark our guilt, Lord, who
would survive? But with You is found forgiveness: for this we
revere You.
My soul is waiting for the Lord. I count on His word. My
soul is longing for the Lord more than watchman for daybreak.
On 4: Let the watchman count on daybreak and Israel on
the Lord.
Because with the Lord there is mercy and fullness of
redemption, Israel indeed He will redeem from all its iniquity.

Psalm 116
Praise the Lord, all you nations, acclaim Him all you
peoples!
Strong is the love of the Lord for us; He is faithful forever.
Glory: now and ever:
_________________________________________________
If there is an entrance, at the conclusion of the hymns, the
deacon says quietly to the priest:
Let us pray to the Lord.
And the priest says quietly the Prayer of the Entrance:
Good and loving King, Who have blessed all things, we
258

Order of Vespers

fervently implore You with contrite heart and humble spirit to
bless our comings and goings. For Your coming and going,
and Your dwelling among us are blessed, O Christ our true
God, always, now and ever and forever. Amen.
After this, the deacon says to the priest:
Master, bless the holy entrance.
The priest:
Blessed is the entrance into Your holy of holies, always,
now and ever and forever.
Deacon: Amen.
_________________________________________________
And immediately the deacon or the priest:
Wisdom! Be attentive!
And the choir:
O Joyful Light of the holy glory of the Father Immortal,
the heavenly, holy, blessed One, O Jesus Christ, now that we
have reached the setting of the sun, and see the evening light,
we sing to God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. It is fitting at all
times to raise a song of praise in measured melody to You, O
Son of God, the Giver of Life. Therefore, the universe sings
Your glory.
Then, the deacon: Let us be attentive!
The priest: Peace be to all!
Again, the deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive!

259

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

If it is [a period when] God the Lord [is sung] these
prokeimena are sung:
On Saturday evening, Tone 6, Psalm 92:
The Lord reigns, He is clothed in majesty!
Verse: Robed is the Lord and girt about with strength.
Verse: The world He made firm, not to be moved.
Verse: Holiness is fitting to Your house, O Lord, until the
end of time.
On Sunday evening, Tone 8, Psalm 133:
Come, bless the Lord, all you who serve the Lord.
Verse: Who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts
of the house of our God.
On Monday evening, Tone 4, Psalm 4:
The Lord hears me whenever I call Him.
Verse: When I call, answer me, O God of Justice.
On Tuesday evening, Tone 1, Psalm 22:
life.

Your mercy, O Lord, shall follow me all the days of my

Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, there is nothing I shall
want; fresh and green are the pastures where He gives me
repose.
On Wednesday evening, Tone 5, Psalm 53:
O God, save me by Your Name, by Your power uphold
my cause.
Verse: O God, hear my prayer; listen to the words of my
mouth.
260

Order of Vespers

On Thursday evening, Tone 6, Psalm 120:
My help shall come from the Lord, Who made heaven
and earth.
Verse: I lift up my eyes to the mountains, from where
shall come my help?
On Friday evening, Tone 7, Psalm 58:
You, O God, are my defender and Your mercy goes before me.
Verse: Rescue me, O God, from my foes; protect me
from those who attack me.
_________________________________________________
It is necessary to be aware if it is the Fast and Alleluia [is
sung], in place of the prokeimena we sing this:
On Monday evening, Alleluia, three times in Tone 6
[Psalm 6]:
Verse: O Lord, rebuke me not in Your anger, chastise me
not in Your wrath. Alleluia!
Verse: [Now and ever]: and forever.
And we sing with a higher tone: Alleluia.
On Tuesday and Thursday evening [Psalm 98]:
Alleluia.
Verse: Extol the Lord, our God, and worship at His
footstool for He is holy. Alleluia!
Verse: [Now and ever]: and forever. Alleluia!
On Wednesday evening [Psalm 18]: Alleluia.
Verse: Through all the earth their voice resounds; their
message reaches to the ends of the world. Alleluia!
Verse: [Now and ever]: and forever. Alleluia!
261

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

But on Sunday and Friday evenings,
Alleluia is never sung.
_________________________________________________
After the prokeimenon, if directed by the typicon, the lector
reads the paremia. Before each reading the deacon exclaims:
Wisdom, and after the introduction of the reading from which
they are taken (that is: Genesis, or Proverbs, or the Universal
Epistle and the others), he says: Let us be attentive.
Then the deacon says:
At daily Vespers the ektenia Let us all say: is not said,
but after the prokeimenon Make us worthy, O Lord: is said
immediately.
Let us all say, with our whole soul and with our whole
mind, let us say:
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
O Lord almighty, God of our Fathers, we pray You, hear
and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
After each petition the choir sings: Lord, have mercy
three times.
In parish churches:
Again we pray for our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome,
and for our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
262

Order of Vespers

(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for those who
serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual
fathers, and for all our brothers and sisters in Christ.
In monasteries:
Again we pray for our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome,
and for our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for our venerable
hieromonks: Proto-archimandrite (Name), Archimandrite
(Name), Proto-hegumen (Name), and Hegumen (Name), for
those who serve and have served in this holy monastery, for
our spiritual fathers, and for all our brothers and sisters in
Christ.
Again we pray for our government (or for our Godprotected Emperor or King whose realm it is Name for his
health and salvation) and for all in the service of our country.
Again we pray for the people here present who await Your
great and abundant mercy, for those who show us mercy, and
for all Christians of the true faith.
The priest exclaims:
For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory
to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

Then:

[Daniel 3:52 – Psalm 32:22 – Psalm 119:12]
Make us worthy, O Lord, to be kept sinless this evening.
Blessed are You, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and
praiseworthy and glorious is Your Name forever. Amen.
263

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

May Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us who have placed
our hope in You. Blessed are You, O Lord; teach me Your
commandments. Blessed are You, O Master; make me
understand Your commandments. Blessed are You, O Holy
One; enlighten me with Your commandments.
O Lord, Your mercy is forever; despise not the work of
Your hands. To You is due praise; to You is due a hymn; to
You is glory due, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever. Amen.
The deacon:
Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole evening be perfect, holy, peaceful, and
without sin, let us beseech the Lord.
After each of the following petitions the choir sings: Grant
this, O Lord.
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide and guardian of our
souls and bodies, let us beseech the Lord.
For the pardon and remission of our sins and offenses, let
us beseech the Lord.
For what is good and beneficial to our souls, and for peace
in the world, let us beseech the Lord.
264

Order of Vespers

That we may spend the rest of our life in peace and
repentance, let us beseech the Lord.
For a Christian, painless, unashamed, peaceful end of our
life, and for a good account before the fearsome judgmentseat of Christ, let us beseech the Lord.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For You are a good and loving God, and we give glory to
You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be to all.
Choir: And to your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Prayer at the Bowing of Heads
Lord our God, You bowed the heavens and came down
for the salvation of the human race. Look upon Your servants
and upon Your inheritance, for they have bowed their heads
and bent their necks to You, the awesome Judge Who loves
mankind. They do not expect human help, but await Your
mercy and long for Your salvation. Protect them at all times,
this evening and tonight, from every enemy, from all the
265

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

devil’s assaults, from vain thoughts, and evil imaginings.
Then the priest exclaims:
May the might of Your kingdom be blessed and glorified,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And after the exclamation, the aposticha, in which we
sing, according to the typicon, the daily appointed verses.
[Psalm 122]
Verse 1: To You have I lifted up my eyes, You Who dwell
in the heavens; my eyes, like the eyes of slaves on the hand
of their lords. Like the eyes of a servant on the hand of her
mistress, so our eyes are on the Lord our God till He show us
His mercy.
Verse 2: Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy. We are
filled with contempt.  Indeed all too full is our soul with the
scorn of the rich, with the proud man’s disdain.
At the conclusion of the aposticha:
[The Canticle of Simeon]
[Luke 2: 29-32]
Now You may dismiss Your servant, O Lord, in peace
according to Your word; for my eyes have seen Your salvation
which You have prepared before the face of all people, a light
for revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of Your people
Israel.

266

Order of Vespers

Trisagion, and after Our Father: the priest exclaims: For
Thine is the kingdom:
The choir, or the reader, [sings] the troparia. At daily
Vespers, the deacon [intones] the ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God: see page 262.
After this: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is,
always, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. O God, uphold the holy orthodox (or
catholic) faith, forever.
Priest: O most holy Theotokos, save us.
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond
compare more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave
birth to God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Priest: Glory to You, O Christ God, our hope; glory to
You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy, three
times. Master, give the blessing.
The priest makes the dismissal, and remembers the saint
whose church it is, and the saint whose service is sung.
_________________________________________________
However, if it is the Forty Day or another fast, and Alleluia
is sung, after Now You shall dismiss: say these troparia in
Tone 4:

267

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! Mary, full of grace, the
Lord is with you! Blessed are you among women, and blessed
is the fruit of your womb. For you gave birth to Christ the
Savior and redeemer of our souls. One prostration.
Glory:
O Baptizer of Christ, remember us all, that we be delivered
from our transgressions. For you have been given the grace to
intercede for us. One prostration.
Now and ever:
Pray for us, O holy apostles and all you saints, that we be
delivered from danger and affliction. For we have You as our
fervent intercessors before the Savior. One prostration.
Beneath your compassion we take refuge, O Virgin
Theotokos. Despise not our prayers in our need, but deliver
us from dangers, for you alone are pure and blessed. Without
a prostration.
Lord, have mercy. 40. Lord, give the blessing.
Priest:
Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is, always, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest:
Heavenly King, strengthen our government (or our Godprotected Emperor or our King Name), confirm the faith, calm
the nations, give peace to the world, preserve well this city
268

Order of Vespers

(or village, or this holy monastery). Grant our fathers and
brothers and sisters who have departed before us repose in the
abode of the just, and accept us in repentance and confession,
for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. 3. Glory: now and ever:
More honorable: In the Name of the Lord, Father, give the
blessing.
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord
Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
And immediately three great prostrations with the prayer
of Saint Ephrem:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit
of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.
Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
269

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And again, a final prostration, saying the whole prayer
as given:
Lord and Master of my life: to the end: forever and ever.
Amen. And one great prostration.
Then, Trisagion. And three prostrations. After Our Father:
Lord, have mercy. 12. Then the prayer:
All-Holy Trinity, Consubstantial Power, Indivisible
Kingdom, Cause of all good things, look favorably upon me,
a sinner, at this present hour. Take away all the defilement of
my mind and englighten my understanding that I may always
praise, glorify, and say: One is holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ,
to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
After this:
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, now and forever. Three
times.
Then, Psalm 33: I will bless the Lord at all times: see
page 237. And after this: It is truly proper: Glory: now and
ever: Lord, have mercy. Three times. Give the blessing. And
the dismissal.
This is the order in the Great Fast.
If it is another fast, and Alleluia is sung, after the
prostrations and the Trisagion, and the exclamation: For
Thine is the kingdom: Lord, have mercy. 12. Glory: now and
ever: And again Lord, have mercy. Three times. Give the
blessing. And the dismissal.
270

Order of Vespers

_________________________________________________
If there is Litia, after the exclamation: May the might: we
go to the narthex, singing the stichera of the church or of the
feast.
After this the deacon exclaims:
Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance.
Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the
Christian people of the true faith and send down upon us Your
abundant mercy. Through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of the
precious and life-creating cross; through the protection of the
honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the honorable,
glorious, Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John; of the holy,
glorious, and praiseworthy apostles; (or of the holy apostle
and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles;) and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra in Lycia; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-tothe-apostles, teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing
great prince Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy
Priest-Martyr Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony
and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our
venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous
ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose
church it is), Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate; and
of all the saints; we pray You, O most merciful Lord, hear us
sinners praying to You, and have mercy on us.
271

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Again we pray for our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome,
for his health and salvation, and that the Lord our God ever
hastens and assists him in everything; O Lord, hear us and
have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Again we pray for our most reverend Archbishop and
Metropolitan (Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name),
(but monastics add: for our most venerable fathers our Protoarchimandrite (Name), our Archimandrite (Name), our Protohegumen (Name), and Hegumen (Name) ), for our spiritual
fathers, and for all our brothers and sisters in Christ, and
for every Christian soul that is afflicted and maltreated and
in need of God’s mercies and help; for the protection of this
city and for those who live here (or this village and for those
who live here, or this holy monastery and for those who live
here); for the peace and serenity of the whole world; for the
stability of the holy Churches of God; for the salvation and the
assistance of our fathers and brothers and sisters who labor
and serve with diligence and in the fear of the Lord; for the
absent and those who are traveling; for the healing of those
who lie ill; for the repose, alleviation, blessed memory, and
remission of sins of all our departed fathers and brothers and
sisters of the true faith who are buried here and in every place;
for the deliverance of captives; for our brothers and sisters
who are taking part in these holy services, and for all who
have served and serve in this holy church (if it is a monastery:
in this holy monastery), let us say:
Choir: Kyrie, eleison. 12.

272

Order of Vespers

The priest exclaims:
Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all the ends of the
earth and of those who are far away upon the sea, and be
merciful, be merciful, Master, regarding our sins, and have
mercy on us. For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Then, the priest:
Peace be to all.
Choir: And to your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
And all bow their heads as the priest prays the prayer
aloud:
O most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God,
through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the Theotokos,
and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of the precious
and life-creating cross; through the protection of the
honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the honorable,
glorious Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John; of the holy,
glorious, and praiseworthy apostles; (or of the holy apostle
and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles;) and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra in Lycia; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-tothe-apostles, teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing
273

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

great prince Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy
Priest-Martyr Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony
and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our
venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous
ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose
church it is), Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate;
and of all the saints; make our prayer acceptable. Grant us
remission of our transgressions; protect us with the shadow
of Your wings; drive far from us every enemy and adversary;
make our life peaceful, O Lord. Have mercy on us and on
Your world and save our souls; for You are good and You are
the Lover of Mankind.
Choir: Amen.
And entering the church, we begin to sing the aposticha.
But after the aposticha:
[The Canticle of Simeon
Luke 2:29-32]
Now You may dismiss Your servant, O Lord, in peace
according to Your word; for my eyes have seen Your salvation
which You have prepared before the face of all peoples, a light
for revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of Your people
Israel.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father: Priest:
For Thine is the kingdom: Choir: Amen.
And the dismissal troparion.
Then afterwards, there is the blessing of bread, wheat,
wine, and oil.
274

Order of Vespers

The deacon intones: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
The priest reads the prayer aloud:
O Lord Jesus Christ our God, You blessed the five loaves
and fed the five thousand. Do You, the same Lord, bless this
bread, wheat, wine, and oil, and multiply them in this city (or
in this village, or in this holy monastery) and in the whole
world; and sanctify all the faithful who shall partake of them.
For it is You, O Christ our God, Who bless and sanctify all
things, and we give glory to You with Your eternal Father, and
Your all-holy and good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever
and forever.
Choir: Amen. And sings:
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, now and forever. Three
times.
And we say Psalm 33:
I will bless the Lord at all times,
His praise always on my lips;
my soul shall make its boast.
The humble shall hear and be glad.
Glorify the Lord with me.
Together let us praise His name.
I sought the Lord and He answered me;
from all my terrors He set me free.
Look toward Him and be radiant;
let your faces not be abashed.
The poor man called, the Lord heard him
and rescued him from all his distress.
275

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The angel of the Lord is encamped
around those who revere Him, to resolve them.
Taste and see that the Lord is good.
He is happy who seeks refuge in Him.
Revere the Lord, you His saints.
they lack nothing, those who revere Him.
Strong lions suffer want and go hungry
but those who seek the Lord lack no blessing.
But after the completion of the psalm, facing the people
the priest says:
The blessing of the Lord be upon you through His grace
and loving kindness, always, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
_________________________________________________
If Matins is joined to the All-night Vigil, after Amen, the
reader: Glory to God in the highest: three times, and O Lord,
Open my lips: twice, and then the Six Psalms, see page 89.
_________________________________________________
But if it is not, the deacon says: Wisdom.
And the Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, the One-Who-Is,
always, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen. O God, strengthen the holy orthodox (or
catholic) faith, forever and ever.
Priest: O most holy Theotokos, save us!
Choir:
276

Order of Vespers

More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Priest: Glory to You, O Christ, God, our hope; glory to
You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy 3. Master,
give the blessing.
And the priest says the dismissal and remembers the saint
whose church it is and the saint whose service is sung.

277

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

278

PRAYERS BEFORE AND AFTER
DINNER
BEFORE DINNER
Our Father: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy, three
times. Give the blessing.
The superior or the priest says:
Christ our God, bless this food and drink of Your servants,
for You are holy always, now and ever and forever. Amen.

AFTER DINNER
We give thanks to You, O Christ our God, for having
satisfied us with Your earthly gifts. Do not deprive us of
Your heavenly kingdom, but just as You came among Your
disciples, giving them peace, O Savior, come also among us
and save us.
Lord, have mercy, three times. Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is God, for dealing mercifully with us, for
nourishing us with His abundant gifts, by His grace and love
for mankind, always, now and ever and forever. Amen.
279

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

PRAYERS BEFORE AND AFTER
SUPPER
Going to the table we say:
[Psalm 21:27]
May the poor eat and be filled. May they who seek the
Lord exult in Him, and may their hearts live forever.
Glory: now and ever:
Lord, have mercy, three times. Give the blessing.
And the priest blesses the table.
After eating we say: Glory: now and ever:
Your womb became a sacred table, O Theotokos, for it
held the Bread of Heaven, Christ our God, Who said that
anyone who eats of Him shall live forever.
And after that:

280

More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Then:
[Psalm 4: 7-9]
O Lord, You are glad in Your creation, and in the works of
Your hand we rejoice. O Lord, let the light of Your countenance
shine upon us. You have put into my heart a greater joy than
they have from an abundance of wheat, wine, and oil. I will lie
down in peace and sleep comes at once, for You alone, Lord,
made me dwell in safety.
Glory: now and ever:
Lord, have mercy. Three times. Give the blessing.
Priest:
May God be with us, by His grace and love for mankind,
always, now and ever and forever. Amen.

281

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

282

THE ORDER OF COMPLINE
SMALL COMPLINE
If there is a priest, he says:
Blessed is our God, always, now and ever and forever.
And we say: Amen.
If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
Glory to You, our God, glory to You!
Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, everywhere
present and filling all things, Treasury of Blessings and Giver
of Life, come and dwell within us, cleanse us of all stain, and
save our souls, O gracious One.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have
mercy on us. Three times.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever. Amen.
283

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Most holy Trinity, have mercy on us; Lord, cleanse us of
our sins; Master, forgive our transgressions; Holy One, come
to us and heal our infirmities for Your Name’s sake.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
The priest:
For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
And we: Amen.
Then: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Glory: now and ever:
Come, let us worship our King and God.
Come, let us worship Christ, our King and God.
Come, let us worship and bow before the only
Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

And Psalm 50
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.
In Your compassion blot out my offence.
O wash me more and more from my guilt
and cleanse me from my sin.
284

Small Compline

My offences truly I know them;
my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;
what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence
and be without reproach when You judge
O see, in guilt was I born,
a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed You love truth in the heart;
then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O sprinkle me with hyssop then I shall be clean;
O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,
that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face
and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,
put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,
nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;
with a spirit of fervor sustain me,
That I may teach transgressors Your ways
and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,
and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips
and my mouth will declare Your praise.
285

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For in sacrifice You take no delight,
burnt offering from me You would refuse,
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.
A humbled, contrite heart, O God, You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, O Lord, show favor to Zion;
Rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice,
(burnt offerings wholly consumed),
then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

Psalm 69
O God, make haste to my rescue,
Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion
on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,
who delight in my harm;
Let them retreat, covered with shame,
who jeer at my lot.
Let there be rejoicing and gladness
for all who seek You.
Let them say forever: ‘God is great,’
who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,
come to me, O God.
You are my rescue, my help,
O Lord, do not delay.
286

Small Compline

Psalm 142
Lord, listen to my prayer:
turn Your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, You are just; give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment.
For no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;
he has crushed my life to the ground;
he has made me dwell in darkness
like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;
my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past;
I ponder all Your works.
I muse on what Your hand has wrought
and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You.
Lord, make haste and answer,
for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face
lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love
for I put my trust in You.
Make me know the way I should walk;
to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;
I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will
for You, O Lord, are my God.
287

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let Your good spirit guide me
in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;
in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;
destroy all those who oppress me
for I am Your servant, O Lord.
[The Doxology]
Glory to God in the highest, and to people on earth peace
and good will. We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,
we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory. Lord God,
heavenly King, Father Almighty; Lord, only-begotten Son,
Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, You take away the sin of the world, have mercy on
us. You take away the sins of the world, hear our prayer. You
are seated at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every night, and praise Your Name forever.
O Lord, You have been our refuge from one generation
to the next. I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul
for I have sinned against You. O Lord, I have fled to You for
refuge. Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my
God. In You is the source of life and in Your light we see light.
Extend Your mercy to those who know You.
Then:
Make us worthy, O Lord, to be kept sinless this night.
Blessed are You, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and
praiseworthy and glorious is Your Name forever. Amen.
May Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us who have placed
our hope in You. Blessed are You, O Lord; teach me Your
commandments. Blessed are You, O Master; make me
288

Small Compline

understand Your commandments. Blessed are You, O Holy
One; enlighten me with Your commandments.
O Lord, Your mercy is forever; despise not the work of
Your hands. To You is due praise, to You is due a hymn; to
You is glory due, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever. Amen.
[The Symbol of Faith]
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator of
heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, the only-begotten, born
of the Father before all ages. Light from light, true God from
true God, begotten, not made, one in essence with the Father;
through Whom all things were made. For us men and for our
salvation, He came down from heaven, and was incarnate from
the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man. He was
crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was
buried. He rose on the third day according to the scriptures.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; and He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. And in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of Life, Who proceeds from the
Father. Together with the Father and the Son He is worshiped
and glorified; He spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I profess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead and the
life of the world to come. Amen.
Then the Canon. [If the appointed canon to the Theotokos
for Compline from the Octoechos, or proper liturgical book
is unavailable, we pray the Canon of the Theotokos from
Parakleisis, p. 354.] After that we say:
289

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

It is truly proper to glorify you, O Theotokos, the everblessed, immaculate, and the mother of our God. More
honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to God
the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: After Our Father: For
Thine is the kingdom: The Kontakion of the feast.
However, if it is not a feast, we say the troparion of the
church if it is dedicated to Christ or the Theotokos; and then,
of the day and of the saint of the church [if it is not dedicated
to Christ or the Theotokos].
Then, these troparia:
[Tone 4]
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Your Church throughout the world, O Lord, is clothed
with the blood of Your martyrs as with fine linens and purple
robes; and so the Church cries out to You, O Christ our God:
Send down Your goodness upon Your people; give peace to
Your Church and great mercy to our souls.
Glory:
[Tone 8]
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants, where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
290

Small Compline

Now and ever:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos and all the saints,
give us Your peace and have mercy on us, O Lord, for You
alone are merciful.
On Friday evening, after the troparion of the Church if it is
dedicated to Christ or the Theotokos, say this:
[Tone 2]
Apostles, martyrs, and prophets, bishops, venerable and
righteous saints, you have finished the course and have kept
the faith. Since you can approach the Savior with confidence,
we ask you to beseech His goodness on our behalf, for the
salvation of our souls.
Glory: With the saints give rest:
Now and ever: Kontakion, Tone 8:
To You, O Lord, Gardener of all creation, the world offers
the God-bearing martyrs as the first fruits of nature. Through
their prayers and through the Theotokos preserve Your Church,
Your dwelling-place, in perfect peace, O most merciful One.
Lord, have mercy. 40.
Then the prayer:
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
291

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
Priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us and have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
However, if there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us. Amen.
And then:
Prayer of Supplication to the Most Holy Theotokos
[by the Monk Paul of the Evergetes Monastery]
O Lady Bride of God, virginal, undefiled, incorrupt,
immaculate and chaste, who united God the Word to mankind
through your most glorious birth-giving and joined the fallen
nature of our race to heavenly things; who are the only hope
of the hopeless, the help of the embattled, the ready protection
292

Small Compline

of those who flee to you, and the refuge of all Christians:
despise me not, the sinner, the accursed one, who made myself
altogether unprofitable by impure thoughts, and words, and
deeds, and through slothfulness have become a slave of the
sweet pleasures of life. But, as the Mother who gave birth to
God Who loves mankind, through a similar love for mankind,
take pity upon me, sinner and prodigal, and accept my prayer
offered to you with unclean lips; and, using your maternal
boldness, pray to your Son, our Master and Lord, that He
may open, even to me, the depths of His merciful lovingkindness, and, overlooking my countless transgressions, He
would convert me to repentance, and reveal me to be a faithful
accomplisher of His commandments. As you are merciful,
compassionate, and love what is good, be my constant
companion in this present life as a fervent advocate and
helper, driving away the assaults of enemies, and guide me to
salvation; and at the hour of my departure from this life, care
for my wretched soul and drive far from it the dark forms of
evil demons; and in the fearful day of just judgment, deliver
me from eternal torments and present me as an heir of the
ineffable glory of your Son and our God. May I receive this, O
my Lady, most holy Theotokos, by your mediation and help,
through the grace and love for mankind of your only-begotten
Son, our Lord and God and Savior Jesus Christ, to Whom is
due all glory, honor and worship, together with His Father
without beginning, and His most holy, good, and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever, and forever. Amen.
Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ
[by the Monk Antiochus]
And grant us, O Master, when we depart to sleep, repose
of body and soul, and keep us from the dark slumber of sin
293

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

and from every dark and passionate pleasure of night. Quiet
the assaults of the passions and quench the fiery arrows of
the evil one which are insidiously thrown against us. Subdue
the rebellions of our flesh and still our every earthly and
material thought; and give us, O God, a watchful mind, chaste
thoughts, a sober heart, and a light sleep free of every satanic
fantasy; and raise us up at the time of prayer, strong in the
practice of Your commandments, and with the memory of
Your just judgments held firmly within us; and grant that we
may glorify You all through the night, and that we may sing,
and bless, and glorify Your all-honored and majestic Name:
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and forever. Amen.
O most glorious, Ever-Virgin Theotokos, receive our
prayers, and offer them to your Son and our God, so that
through you, He may save our souls.
[Prayer of Saint Joannicius]

The Father is my hope; the Son is my refuge; and the Holy
Spirit is my protection. O Holy Trinity, glory to You!
Then, the Troparia, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
294

Small Compline

Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
Then the priest says this ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Again, let us pray that He preserve this city (or this
village) and this holy church (although if at a monastery:
this holy monastery) and every city, town, and community
from famine, plague, earthquake, flood, fire, civil war, riot,
and foreign invasion; and that our God Who is kindly and the
Lover of Mankind may forgive our sins and hold back His just
wrath, and that He may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy 12.
The exclamation:
Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all the ends of the
earth and of those who are far away upon the sea, and be
merciful, be merciful, Master, regarding our sins, and have
mercy on us. For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
295

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

[The Dismissal]
Priest:
Glory to You, O Christ God, our hope, glory to You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three
times. Give the blessing.
The priest dismisses:
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother; of our venerable
and God-bearing fathers; and through the prayers of all the
saints; for Christ is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
After the dismissal the priest makes a bow to the brethren,
saying:
Honorable fathers and brothers, bless and forgive me, a
sinner. I have sinned this day (this night) and all the days of
my life, in word, deed, or thought, with all my spiritual and
bodily faculties.
And all the brethren respond thus:
Honorable father: may God forgive you and have mercy
on you.
After this all the brethren make a bow together to the
superior or priest, asking pardon:
Honorable father, bless and forgive me, a sinner. I have
sinned this day (this night) and all the days of my life, in word,
deed, or thought, with all my spiritual and bodily faculties.
296

Small Compline

The superior or priest responds:
May God forgive your sins by His grace and have mercy
on all of you.
Then the superior or priest says the following [petitions
of] pardon:
Let us pray for our holy father (Name), Pope of Rome.
Choir: May God save and have mercy!
For our government.
May God save and have mercy!
(or For our God-protected Emperor or King (Name).
May God protect the power of his kingdom.)
For our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
For our God-loving Bishop (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
For all bishops of the Catholic Church.
May God save and have mercy!
For the worthy founders [and benefactors] of this holy
church (or: this holy monastery).
May God save and have mercy!
For our most venerable Proto-archimandrite (Name),
our Archimandrite (Name), our Proto-hegumen (Name), and
Hegumen (Name).
May God save and have mercy!
297

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For our spiritual fathers and all our brethren in Christ.
May God save and have mercy!
For the absent and those sent on business.
May God protect and have mercy!
For those who are kind to us.
May God reward and have mercy!
For those who did or now serve in this holy church (or:
this holy monastery).
May God save and have mercy!
For those who hate us, and those who love us.
May God forgive and have mercy!
For the deliverance of prisoners.
May God grant freedom and have mercy!
For those who travel by sea, land, or air.
May God direct their journey!
For the ill and suffering.
May God cure and have mercy!
For the afflicted and the imprisoned.
May God visit and have mercy!
For all Christians of the true faith.
May God save and have mercy!

298

Small Compline

For an abundance of the fruits of the earth.
May God increase the fruits of the earth!
If it is Sunday or a feast or a solemn commemoration of
a saint, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
However, if it is not Sunday or a solemn commemoration
of a saint, say this for the departed:
Let us remember the founders of this holy church (or: this
holy monastery).
May God remember them and give them rest!
Our parents and relatives.
May God remember them and give them rest!
Our departed fathers and brethren.
May God remember them and give them rest!
Those who died in war for the Catholic faith.
May God remember them and give them rest!
For those buried or enrolled here, and for Christians of the
true faith everywhere.
May their memory be eternal!
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
299

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

300

GREAT COMPLINE
The priest: Blessed is our God:
And we:
Glory to You, our God, glory to You. Heavenly King:
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father. Lord, have mercy.
12.
Come, let us worship: Three times.
And immediately, if it is the first week of the Great Forty
Day Fast, we begin:
[Part I]

Psalm 69
O God make haste to my rescue,
Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion
on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,
who delight in my harm,
let them retreat, covered with shame,
who jeer at my lot.
301

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let there be rejoicing and gladness
for all who seek You.
Let them say forever: ‘God is great,’
who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,
come to me, O God.
You are my rescuer, my help,
O Lord, do not delay.
And we sing the Great Canon.
However, if it is not, we begin thus:

Psalm 4
When I call, answer me, O God of justice;
from anguish You released me, have mercy
and hear me!
O men, how long will your hearts be closed,
will you love what is futile and seek what is false?
It is the Lord Who grants favors
to those whom He loves;
The Lord hears me whenever I call Him.
Fear Him; do not sin: ponder on your bed and be still.
Make justice your sacrifice and trust in the Lord.
‘What can bring us happiness?’ many say.
Lift up the light of Your face on us, O Lord.
You have put into my heart a greater joy
than they have from abundance of corn
and new wine.
302

Great Compline

I will lie down in peace and sleep comes at once
For You alone, Lord, make me dwell in safety.

Psalm 6
Lord, do not reprove me in Your anger;
punish me not in Your rage.
Have mercy on me, Lord, I have no strength;
Lord, heal me, my body is racked;
my soul is racked with pain.
But You, O Lord…how long?
Return, Lord, rescue my soul.
Save me in Your merciful love;
for in death no one remembers You;
from the grave, who can give You praise?
I am exhausted with my groaning;
every night I drench my pillow with tears;
I soak my bed with weeping.
My eye wastes away with grief;
I have grown old surrounded by my foes.
Leave me, all you who do evil;
for the Lord has heard my weeping.
The Lord has heard my plea;
The Lord will accept my prayer.
All my foes will retire in confusion,
foiled and suddenly confounded.

303

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 12
How long, O Lord, will You forget me?
How long will You hide Your face?
How long will I bear grief in my soul,
This sorrow in my heart day and night?
How long shall my enemy prevail?
Look at me, answer me, Lord my God!
Give light to my eyes, lest I fall asleep in death,
lest my enemy say: ‘I have overcome him’;
lest my foes rejoice to see my fall.
As for me, I trust in Your merciful love.
Let my heart rejoice in Your saving help.
Let me sing to the Lord for His goodness to me,
singing psalms to the name of the Lord,
the Most High.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:

Psalm 24
To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul.
I trust You, let me not be disappointed;
do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,
but only those who wantonly break faith.

304

Great Compline

Lord, make me know Your ways.
Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,
for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long
because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,
and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.
In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.
He shows the path to those who stray.
He guides the humble in the right path;
He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love
for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name
forgive my guilt, for it is great.
If anyone fears the Lord
He will show him the path he should choose.
His soul shall live in happiness
and his children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;
to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,
for He rescues my feet from the snare.
305

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Turn to me and have mercy
for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart
and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil
and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,
how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me;
do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me;
For my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God, from all its distress.

Psalm 30
In You, O Lord, I take refuge.
Let me never be put to shame.
In Your justice, set me free,
hear me and speedily rescue me.
Be a rock of refuge for me,
a mighty stronghold to save me,
for You are my rock, my stronghold.
For Your name’s sake, lead me and guide me.
Release me from the snares they have hidden
for You are my refuge, Lord.
Into Your hands I commend my spirit.
It is You Who will redeem me, Lord.
306

Great Compline

O God of truth You detest
those who worship false and empty gods.
As for me, I trust in the Lord;
let me be glad and rejoice in Your love.
You have seen my affliction
and taken heed of my soul’s distress,
have not handed me over to the enemy,
but set my feet at large.
Have mercy on me, O Lord,
for I am in distress.
Tears have wasted my eyes,
my throat and my heart.
For my life is spent with sorrow
and my years with sighs.
Affliction has broken down my strength
and my bones waste away.
In the face of all my foes
I am a reproach,
an object of scorn to my neighbors
and of fear to my friends.
Those who see me in the street
run far away from me.
I am like a dead man, forgotten,
like a thing thrown away.
I have heard the slander of the crowd,
fear is all around me,
as they plot together against me,
as they plan to take my life.
307

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

But as for me, I trust in You, Lord,
I say, ‘You are my God.
My life is in Your hands, deliver me
from the hands of those who hate me.
Let Your face shine on Your servant.
Save me in Your love.
Let me not be put to shame for I call You,
let the wicked be shamed!
Let them be silenced in the grave,
let lying lips be dumb,
that speak haughtily against the just
with pride and contempt.’
How great is the goodness, Lord,
that You keep for those who fear You,
that You show to those who trust You
in the sight of men.
You hide them in the shelter of Your presence
from the plotting of men;
You keep them safe within Your tent
from disputing tongues.
Blessed be the Lord Who has shown me
the wonders of His love
in a fortified city.
‘I am far removed from Your sight’
I said in my alarm.
Yet You heard the voice of my plea
when I cried for help.
308

Great Compline

Love the Lord, all you saints.
He guards His faithful
but the Lord will repay to the full
those who act with pride.
Be strong, let your heart take courage,
all who hope in the Lord.

Psalm 90
He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High
and abides in the shade of the Almighty
says to the Lord: ‘My refuge,
my stronghold, my God in Whom I trust!’
It is He Who will free you from the snare
of the fowler who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions
and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night
nor the arrow that flies by day,
nor the plague that prowls in the darkness
nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side,
ten thousand at your right,
you, it will never approach;
His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look
to see how the wicked are repaid,
309

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

you who have said: ‘Lord, my refuge!’
and have made the Most High your dwelling.
Upon you no evil shall fall,
no plague approach where you dwell.
For you has He commanded His angels,
to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands
lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread
and trample the young lion and the dragon.
Since he clings to Me in love, I will free him;
protect him for he knows My name.
When he calls I shall answer: ‘I am with you.’
I will save him from distress and give him glory.
With length of days I will content him;
I shall let him see My saving power.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God. Three
times.
Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:

310

Great Compline

And we say the verses.
[Isaiah 8:8-10, 12-14, 17-18; 9:2, 6-7]
First choir:
God is with us! Understand, O you nations, and submit
yourselves, for God is with us.
Second choir: the same.
Then, in turn, each choir sings their verse:
First choir:
Give ear, to the ends of the earth, for God is with us.
Second choir:
You mighty ones, submit yourselves, for God is with us.
[They continue, alternating each verse:]
If you strengthen yourselves again, again you will be
defeated, for God is with us.
And form a plan, but the Lord will thwart it, for God is
with us.
And whatever word you will speak will not stand even
among yourselves, for God is with us.
We will not fear what you fear nor shall we be dismayed,
for God is with us.
Hallow the Lord our God and He will be our fear, for God
is with us.
And if I should trust in Him, He shall be my sanctification,
for God is with us.
And I will hope in Him and by Him will we be saved, for
God is with us.
311

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Here am I with the children God has given me, for God
is with us.
The people who walked in darkness, have seen a great
light, for God is with us.
Upon you who dwelt in the shadow of death, a light has
shone, for God is with us.
For a Child is born to us; a son is given to us, for God is
with us.
Upon His shoulder dominion rests, for God is with us.
And of His peace there is no end, for God is with us.
And His name shall be called Angel of Great Counsel, for
God is with us.
Wonderful Counselor, for God is with us.
Mighty God, Ruler, Prince of Peace, for God is with us.
Father of the age to come, for God is with us.
Glory: First choir: for God is with us.
Now and ever: Second choir: for God is with us.
Then the two choirs together:
God is with us! Understand, O you nations, and submit
yourselves, for God is with us.
And immediately, these appointed troparia.
First choir:
The day having passed, I thank You, Lord, and pray You:
grant that the evening and night be without sin, O Savior, and
save me.
Second choir: Glory:
The day having passed, I glorify You, Master, and pray
You: grant that the evening and night be undisturbed, O
Savior, and save me.
312

Great Compline

Then both choirs: Now and ever:
The day having passed, I hymn You, Holy One, and pray
You: grant that the evening and night be without temptation,
O Savior, and save me.
The two choirs together:
The bodiless nature of the cherubim glorify You with
never-silent hymns.
The six-winged beings, the seraphim, highly extol You
with unceasing voices.
And all the angelic hosts greatly praise You with thriceholy hymns.
Before all things You are the Father, with Your co-eternal
Son;
and bearing the Spirit of life, equal in honor, You manifest
the undivided Trinity.
Most holy Virgin Mother of God, and you eyewitness and
servants of the Word;
with the choirs of prophets and martyrs who dwell in
immortal life;
pray for us all unceasingly, for we all are in distress;
that being delivered from the deceptions of evil, we may
cry out with the angelic hymn:
Holy, holy, holy, Thrice-holy Lord, have mercy on us and
save us. Amen.
Then:

313

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

[The Symbol of Faith]
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator of
heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, the only-begotten, born
of the Father before all ages. Light from light, true God from
true God, begotten, not made, one in essence with the Father;
through Whom all things were made. For us men and for our
salvation, He came down from heaven, and was incarnate from
the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man. He was
crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was
buried. He rose on the third day according to the scriptures.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; and He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. And in the Holy
Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of Life, Who proceeds from the
Father. Together with the Father and the Son He is worshiped
and glorified; He spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I profess one baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead and the
life of the world to come. Amen.
And immediately, Most holy Lady: which is said three
times, but the rest are all said twice.
Most holy Lady, Theotokos, pray to God for us sinners.
Angels and archangels, all you powers of heaven, pray to
God for us sinners.
Holy John, Prophet, and Forerunner, and Baptizer of the
Lord, pray to God for us sinners.
Holy glorious apostles, prophets and martyrs, and all
saints, pray to God for us sinners.
314

Great Compline

Our venerable and God-bearing fathers, pastors and
ecumenical teachers, pray to God for us sinners.
Here the patron saint of the church is said.
Invincible and ineffable, and divine power of the precious
and life-creating cross, do not forsake us sinners.
O God, be merciful to us sinners.
O God, cleanse us of our sins, and have mercy on us
Then, Trisagion: Most Holy Trinity: to Our Father:
If it is a feast, we say the troparion of the feast.
But if it is not, on Monday and Wednesday evening, these
troparia, in Tone 2:
Give light to my eyes, O Christ God, lest I fall asleep in
death, lest my enemies say: “I have overcome him.”
Verse: Look upon me and hear me, O Lord, my God.
And the same again: Give light to my eyes:
Glory:
O God, be the defender of my soul, for I walk through the
midst of many enemies. Deliver me from them, and save me,
O Good One, for You love mankind.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our
many sins, O Virgin Theotokos, intercede for us with the One
Who was born of you, for a mother’s prayer is a powerful
means for obtaining the Master’s favor. You are most worthy
315

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

of veneration, so do not turn away from the pleading of us
sinners; for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our
sake is full of mercy. And His power is sufficient to save us.
On Tuesday and Thursday evening, other troparia, Tone 8:
O Lord, You know well the alertness of my invisible
enemies and the weakness of my own wretched body, for You
Yourself have made me. Therefore, I entrust my soul in Your
hands; cover me with the wings of Your merciful goodness,
lest I sleep to death; enlighten my eyes with the delight of
Your divine words; awaken me at the time appointed for
Your glorification, for You alone are good and the Lover of
Mankind.
Verse: Look upon me and hear me, O Lord, my God.
How dreadful is Your judgment-seat, O Lord, when
angels will be standing, all people assembled, the Book of
Life opened, all works uncovered, and all thoughts revealed!
What judgment shall be mine, O Lord, for I was conceived in
sin! Who shall put out for me the raging fires? Who shall bring
light to my darkness, if You, O Lord, Who love mankind, have
no mercy on me?
Glory:
Give me tears, O God, as You did to the sinful woman;
make me worthy to wash Your feet that saved me from the
ways of delusion. Grant that I may offer You as a fragrant
ointment a blameless life that repentance has redeemed, so
that I also may hear Your sweet words: Go in peace, your faith
has saved you.
316

Great Compline

Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, because of my great confidence in you, I
shall obtain salvation. Because I have succeeded in having
you for my intercessor, O most Pure One, I shall not fear.
Imploring your most powerful help, I shall pursue my
enemies and drive them away, for I wear your protection as
a breastplate. O Lady, save me through your prayers, and,
by the power of the Son of God Who was incarnate of you,
awaken me from my dark slumber that I may sing your glory.
Lord, have mercy. 40.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us. Amen.
And this prayer of Saint Basil the Great:
Lord, O Lord! As You delivered us this day from the
arrows that fly in daylight, so now deliver us and keep us safe
from everything that lurks about in the darkness of night. To
You we raise our hands in prayer: accept this as our evening
sacrifice. Make us worthy of sleep free from sin, sheltered
from all evil. Keep far from us all the fearful temptations,
and every confusion or cowardice that comes from the devil.
Fill our souls with contrition and our minds with anxious
317

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

care as we become aware of the strictness with which You
search our thoughts on Your dread and just day of judgment.
Nail our flesh to fear of You. Mortify our bodies, that in the
quiet of sleep, we may be illumined with the vision of Your
judgments. Spare us from indecent dreams and all improper
desires. Awaken us in time for prayer, strong in faith and
ready to observe all You have taught us. Through the lovingkindness of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are
blessed, together with Your all-holy, good, and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever and forever, Amen.
[Part II]
And immediately: Come, let us worship: three times.
Then, Psalm 50, See page 14.

Psalm 101
O Lord, listen to my prayer
and let my cry for help reach You.
Do not hide Your face from me
in the day of my distress.
Turn Your ear towards me
and answer me quickly when I call.
For my days are vanishing like smoke,
my bones burn away like a fire.
My heart is withered like the grass.
I forget to eat my bread.
I cry with all my strength
and my skin clings to my bones.
I have become like a pelican in the wilderness
like an owl in desolate places.
I lie awake and I moan
318

Great Compline

like some lonely bird on a roof.
All day long my foes revile me;
those who hate me use my name as a curse.
The bread I eat is ashes;
my drink is mingled with tears.
In Your anger, Lord, and in Your fury
You have lifted me up and thrown me down.
My days are like a passing shadow
and I wither away like the grass.
But You, O Lord, will endure forever
and Your name from age to age.
You will arise and have mercy on Zion;
for this is the time to have mercy,
yes, the time appointed has come
for Your servants love her very stones,
are moved with pity even for her dust.
The nations shall fear the name of the Lord
and all the earth’s kings Your glory,
when the Lord shall build up Zion again
and appear in all His glory.
Then He will turn to the prayers of the helpless;
He will not despise their prayers.
Let this be written for ages to come
that a people yet unborn may praise the Lord;
for the Lord leaned down from His sanctuary on high.
He looked down from heaven to the earth
that He might hear the groans of the prisoners
and free those condemned to die.
319

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The sons of Your servants shall dwell untroubled
and their race shall endure before You
that the name of the Lord
may be proclaimed in Zion
and His praise in the heart of Jerusalem,
when peoples and kingdoms are gathered together
to pay their homage to the Lord.
He has broken my strength in mid-course;
He has shorted the days of my life.
I say to God: “Do not take me away
before my days are complete,
You, Whose days last from age to age.
Long ago You founded the earth
and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
They will perish but You will remain.
They will all wear out like a garment.
You will change them like clothes that are changed,
but You neither change, nor have an end.”

Prayer of Manasseh, King of Judea
O Lord Almighty, God of our fathers: of Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, and of their righteous descendants, Who
made heaven and earth with all their splendor, Who bound
the sea by Your word of command, Who closed the deep and
sealed it with Your fearful and glorious Name, before Whom
all things fear and before the power of Your countenance
tremble because Your glorious magnificence is unendurable
320

Great Compline

and the wrath of Your threat to sinners is irresistible. But Your
promised mercy is immeasurable and inscrutable, for You are
the Lord Most High, compassionate, long-suffering, and of
much mercy, and You repent over the evils of mankind. You,
O Lord, according to Your great goodness, have promised
repentance and forgiveness to those who sinned against You,
and in the abundance of Your mercies You decreed repentance
for sinners that they may be saved. Therefore, O Lord, God of
powers, You have not appointed repentance for the righteous:
for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob who did not sin against You;
but You have appointed repentance for me, a sinner, because
my sins exceed the number of grains of the sands of the sea.
My transgressions are multiplied, O Lord; my transgressions
are multiplied, and I am unworthy to look up and to see the
heights of heaven because of the multitude of my iniquities. I
am weighed down by many iron fetters so that I cannot raise my
head; and there is no release for me because I have provoked
Your anger and have done what is evil in Your sight, not
doing Your will nor keeping Your commandments [setting up
abominations and multiplying offenses.] And now, I bend the
knee of my heart; and beseech You for Your kindness. I have
sinned, O Lord, I have sinned; and I know my transgressions;
but I earnestly beseech You; release me, O Lord, release me;
do not destroy me with my transgressions. Do not be angry
against me forever or remember my evils nor condemn me to
the depths of the earth! For You, O God, are the God of those
who repent, and in me You will manifest all Your kindness;
and although I am not worthy, You will save me according to
Your abundant mercies, and I shall praise You continually all
the days of my life, for all the powers of heaven praise You,
and Yours is the glory forever and ever. Amen.

321

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Priest: For
Thine is the kingdom:
And these troparia, in Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
Lord, have mercy. 40.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.

322

Great Compline

The priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us. Amen.
And the prayer:
[Prayer to the Holy Trinity of Saint Mardarius]
O God, Master, Almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord
Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, One God, One Power,
have mercy on me a sinner and save me, Your unworthy
servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are
blessed forever and ever. Amen.
[Part III]
Then: Come, let us worship: three times.
And immediately:

Psalm 69
O God make haste to my rescue,
Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion
on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,
who delight in my harm,
let them retreat, covered with shame,
who jeer at my lot.
Let there be rejoicing and gladness
for all who seek You.
323

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let them say forever: ‘God is great,’
who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,
come to me, O God.
You are my rescuer, my help,
O Lord, do not delay.

Psalm 142
Lord, listen to my prayer:
turn Your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, You are just; give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment.
For no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;
he has crushed my life to the ground;
he has made me dwell in darkness
like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;
my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past;
I ponder all Your works.
I muse on what Your hand has wrought
and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You.
Lord, make haste and answer;
for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face
lest I become like those in the grave.

324

Great Compline

In the morning let me know Your love
for I put my trust in You.
Make me know the way I should walk:
to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;
I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will
for You, O Lord, are my God.
Let Your good spirit guide me
in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;
in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;
destroy all those who oppress me
for I am Your servant, O Lord.
[The Doxology]
Glory to God in the highest, and to people on earth peace
and good will. We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,
we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory. Lord God,
heavenly King, Father Almighty; Lord, only-begotten Son,
Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, You take away the sin of the world, have mercy on
us. You take away the sins of the world, hear our prayer. You
are seated at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every night, and praise Your Name forever.
325

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Lord, You have been our refuge from one generation
to the next. I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul
for I have sinned against You. O Lord, I have fled to You for
refuge. Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my
God. In You is the source of life and in Your light we see light.
Extend Your mercy to those who know You.
Make us worthy, O Lord, to be kept sinless this night.
Blessed are You, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and
praiseworthy and glorious is Your Name forever. Amen.
May Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us who have placed
our hope in You. Blessed are You, O Lord; teach me Your
commandments. Blessed are You, O Master; make me
understand Your commandments. Blessed are You, O Holy
One; enlighten me with Your commandments. O Lord, Your
mercy is forever; despise not the work of Your hands.
To You is due praise, to You is due a hymn; to You is glory
due, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Amen.
After this we say the canon of the saint appointed, or the
Theotokos, and after the completion of the canon and troparia:
It is truly proper: Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father:
Then we sing in a loud voice, and slowly, in Tone 6:

Psalm 150
Lord of powers be with us, for in times of distress we have
no other help but You. Lord of powers, have mercy on us!
And the second choir repeats the same.

326

Great Compline

And the first choir sings:
Verse 1: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His
mighty heavens.
Lord of powers, be with us:
Second choir:
Verse 2: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His
surpassing greatness.
Lord of powers, be with us:
Verse 3: O praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him
with lute and harp.
Lord of powers, be with us:
Verse 4: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him
with strings and pipe.
Lord of powers, be with us:
Verse 5: O praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise
Him with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and
that breathes give praise to the Lord.
Lord of powers, be with us:
Then both choirs, having descended from the krilos,
sing these verses:
Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty
heavens.
Lord of powers be with us, for in times of distress we have
no other help but You. Lord of powers, have mercy on us!
327

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
O Lord, had we not Your saints to intercede for us and
Your bounty to have mercy on us, how would we dare, O
Savior, to sing to You Whom the Angels endlessly praise? O
You Who know the heart, spare our souls!
Now and ever:
Great is the number of my transgressions, O Theotokos.
It is in you, all-chaste one, that I seek refuge in my need for
salvation. Visit my diseased soul and intercede with your Son,
our God, that He deign to forgive the evil I have done, O you
who alone are blessed.
Most holy Theotokos, forsake me not all the time of my
life, entrust me not to human protection, but you yourself take
care of my safety, and have mercy on me.
To you I entrust all my hope, O Mother of God; keep me
under your protection.
Lord, have mercy. 40.
O good God, in all times and in all places You are
worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You
are long-suffering and most-merciful. You love the just and
show mercy to the sinner, calling all to salvation through the
promise of blessings to come. Do You, the same Lord, at this
hour receive our supplications and direct our lives in the path
of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies;
set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all
affliction, evil and illness; surround us with Your holy angels
so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain
oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unapproachable
glory, for You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
328

Great Compline

Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Glory: now and ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave birth to
God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
Give the blessing, Father, in the Name of the Lord.
The priest:
[Numbers 6:24-26]
May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause
His countenance to shine upon us and have mercy on us.
We: Amen.
If there is no priest, say:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us. Amen.
And we make three great prostrations, saying this prayer
of Saint Ephrem, dividing it in three parts:
Lord and Master of my life, spare me from the spirit
of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
Prostration.
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity,
humility, patience and love. Prostration.
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins, and not
judge my brothers and sisters, for You are blessed, forever and
ever. Amen. Prostration.

329

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then twelve small bows, saying at each bow:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
O Lord, forgive me for I have sinned without number.
And again, this prayer a final time:
O Lord, and Master of my life: to the end: forever and
ever. Amen. And one great prostration.
Then: Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity: Our Father: Lord,
have mercy. 12.
And The Prayer of Supplication
to the Most Holy Theotokos
[by the Monk Paul of the Evergetes Monastery]
O Lady Bride of God, virginal, undefiled, incorrupt,
immaculate and chaste, who united God the Word to mankind
through your most glorious birth-giving and joined the fallen
nature of our race to heavenly things; who are the only hope
of the hopeless, the help of the embattled, the ready protection
of those who flee to you, and the refuge of all Christians:
despise me not, the sinner, the accursed one, who made myself
altogether unprofitable by impure thoughts, and words, and
deeds, and through slothfulness have become a slave of the
sweet pleasures of life. But, as the Mother who gave birth to
God Who loves mankind, through a similar love for mankind,
take pity upon me, sinner and prodigal, and accept my prayer
offered to you with unclean lips. And, using your maternal
boldness, pray to your Son, our Master and Lord, that He
may open, even to me, the depths of His merciful lovingkindness, and, overlooking my countless transgressions, He
330

Great Compline

would convert me to repentance, and reveal me to be a faithful
accomplisher of His commandments. As you are merciful,
compassionate, and love what is good, be my constant
companion in this present life as a fervent advocate and
helper, driving away the assaults of enemies, and guide me to
salvation. And at the hour of my departure from this life, care
for my wretched soul and drive far from it the dark forms of
evil demons; and in the fearful day of just judgment, deliver
me from eternal torments and present me as an heir of the
ineffable glory of your Son and our God. May I receive this, O
my Lady, most holy Theotokos, by your mediation and help,
through the grace and love for mankind of your only-begotten
Son, our Lord and God and Savior Jesus Christ, to Whom is
due all glory, honor and worship, together with His Father
without beginning, and His most holy, good, and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever, and forever. Amen.
Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ
[by the Monk Antiochus]
And grant us, O Master, when we depart to sleep, repose
of body and soul, and keep us from the dark slumber of sin
and from every dark and passionate pleasure of night. Quiet
the assaults of the passions and quench the fiery arrows of
the evil one which are insidiously thrown against us. Subdue
the rebellions of our flesh and still our every earthly and
material thought. And give us, O God, a watchful mind,
chaste thoughts, a sober heart, and a light sleep free of every
satanic fantasy. And raise us up at the time of prayer, strong in
the practice of Your commandments, and with the memory of
Your just judgments held firmly within us. And grant that we
may glorify You all through the night, and that we may sing,
and bless, and glorify Your all-honored and majestic Name:
331

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and forever. Amen.
O most glorious, Ever-Virgin Theotokos, receive our
prayers, and offer them to your Son and our God, so that
through you, He may save our souls.
[Prayer of Saint Joannicius]
The Father is my hope; the Son is my refuge; and the Holy
Spirit is my protection. O Holy Trinity, glory to You!
Then, the Troparia, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
Then the priest says the ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
332

Great Compline

Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Again, let us pray that He preserve this city (or this village)
and this holy church (if at a monastery: this holy monastery)
and every city, town, and community from famine, plague,
earthquake, flood, fire, civil war, riot, and foreign invasion;
and that our God Who is kindly and the Lover of Mankind
may forgive our sins and hold back His just wrath, and that He
may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
The exclamation:
Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all the ends of the
earth and of those who are far away upon the sea, and be
merciful, be merciful, Master, regarding our sins, and have
mercy on us. For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
[The Dismissal]
The priest: Glory to You, O Christ our God, our hope,
glory to You.
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three
times. Give the blessing.
During the holy Great Forty Day Fast, instead of the
dismissal, while we bow to the ground, the priest exclaims:
O most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God,
through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the Theotokos,
and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of the precious
and life-creating cross; through the protection of the
333

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the honorable,
glorious Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John; of the holy,
glorious, and praiseworthy apostles; (or of the holy apostle
and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles); and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-to-the-apostles,
teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing great prince
Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy Priest-Martyr
Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious martyrs; of our
venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony and Theodosius
of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our venerable and
God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous ancestors of
God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose church it is),
Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate; and of all the
saints; make our prayer acceptable. Grant us remission of our
transgressions; protect us with the shadow of Your wings;
drive far from us every enemy and adversary; make our life
peaceful, O Lord. Have mercy on us and on Your world and
save our souls; for You are good and You love mankind.
Then the priest, having bowed to the ground, says to the
brethren:
Honorable father and brothers: and the rest, see pages
296-299.
And we go to our cells, saying
this prayer:

334

Great Compline

O Lord, Lover of Mankind, forgive those who hate us and
those who have wronged us. Do good to those who do good.
Grant to our brothers and sisters and relatives those petitions
which are for salvation and life eternal. Visit the sick, and grant
them healing. Guide those who sail upon the sea, travel with
those who travel by land or air. Assist our government (or our
God-protected Emperor or King). To those who have served us
and have been kind to us, grant forgiveness of their sins. Upon
those who have asked us, unworthy though we be, to pray for
them, have mercy, according to Your great goodness. Keep in
remembrance, O Lord, our fathers, brothers and sisters who
have fallen asleep before us, and give them rest where the
light of Your countenance will visit them. Remember, O Lord,
our brothers and sisters who are in captivity, and release them
from all the troubles that afflict them. Remember, Lord, those
who bring gifts, and the benefactors of Your holy churches,
and grant them those petitions which are for salvation and
life eternal. Remember us also, O Lord, Your humble, and
sinful, and unworthy servants, and enlighten our minds with
the light of Your wisdom, and guide us in the way of Your
commandments. Through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and of all Your saints, for
You are blessed forever. Amen.
The end of Great Compline.

335

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

336

PRAYERS BEFORE SLEEP
Begining: Blessed is our God:
If there is no priest:
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us. We: Amen.
Trisagion. Most Holy Trinity. And after Our Father:
These troparia:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
337

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then: Lord, have mercy. 12.
And these prayers in order with understanding and
contrition.

The First Prayer,
of Saint Macarius the Great, to God the Father
O eternal God and Ruler of all creation, You have allowed
me to reach this hour. Forgive the sins I committed today by
word, deed, or in thought. Purify me, O Lord, from every
spiritual and physical stain. Grant me, Lord, to pass the
sleep of this night in peace. Grant that I may rise from this
lowly bed to glorify You by my deeds throughout my entire
lifetime, and that I may be victorious over every spiritual and
physical enemy. Deliver me, O Lord, from all vain thoughts
and evil desires, for Yours, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, now and ever and
forever. Amen.

The Second Prayer,
to our Lord Jesus Christ, of Saint Antiochus
O Almighty Word of the Father, Jesus Christ, Who alone
are perfect: according to the greatness of Your mercy, do not
abandon me, Your servant, but ever rest in my heart. O Jesus,
Good Shepherd of Your sheep, deliver me from the attacks
of the devil. Do not allow me to become the prey of Satan’s
evil intention, even though I have within me the seeds of
eternal damnation. Instead, O Jesus Christ, Lord God, holy
King Who alone are worshiped, while I sleep protect me by
Your Unwaning Light, the Holy Spirit, through Whom You
sanctified Your disciples. O Lord, grant salvation to me, Your
338

Prayers Before Sleep

unworthy servant, as I lie in my bed. Enlighten my mind by
the light of understanding of Your holy Gospel, my soul by the
love of Your cross, my heart by the purity of Your teaching.
Protect my body by Your sacred passion, my senses by Your
humility, and awaken me in due time for Your glorification.
For You, above all, are glorified with Your eternal Father, and
Your most Holy Spirit, forever. Amen.

The Third Prayer,
to the Most Holy Spirit
O Lord, heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth,
have compassion and mercy on me, Your unworthy servant.
Forgive me, unworthy as I am, and remit whatever sins I have
committed today both through human frailty and through
acting less than human. Forgive my voluntary and involuntary
sins, those committed knowingly or through ignorance—
which are from my youth and the knowledge of evil—and
those which have arisen from arrogance and despondency.
Forgive me if I have reproached or cursed someone in my
anger, or if I have afflicted grief or have become angry for
some reason. Forgive me if I have lied, or unsuitably slept,
or turned away a poor person who came to me. Forgive me
if I have caused grief for my brother or sister, or judged, or
condemned someone. Forgive me if, while at prayer, my mind
wandered on the glamorous things of this world, or if I thought
about depraved things. Forgive me if I was guilty of acting
foolishly, thought evil, or desired in my heart the property of
another. Forgive me if I have said indecent things or laughed
at the sin of my brother or sister without discerning my own
sins, which are great in number. Forgive me if I have been
neglectful in my prayers, or guilty of some evil action which
I cannot now recall, for I have committed these sins and even
339

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

much greater sins. Have mercy on me, Your dejected and
unworthy servant, O my Master and Creator. Remit, pardon,
and forgive me, for You are good and the Lover of Mankind.
May I, who am dissolute, sinful, and cursed, lie down in peace
to sleep and rest, and I will worship, praise, and glorify Your
most honorable Name with the Father and His only-begotten
Son, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Fourth Prayer,
of Saint Macarius the Great
What shall I offer to You, or what shall I give to You, O
great Gift-giver, Immortal King, Lord and Lover of Mankind?
Though I was lazy in pleasing You and did nothing good, You
brought me to the end of this day which has passed, effecting
the conversion and salvation of my soul. Be merciful to me,
a sinner and one who is empty of any good deed. Raise up
my fallen soul which has been stained by immeasurable sins.
Take away from me every thought which is wicked in this
life, O sinless One. You alone can forgive my sins which I
have committed against You today, either knowingly or
unknowingly, by word, deed, or thought and with all of my
senses. You alone are my protection. Through Your divine
authority, Your inexpressible love for mankind, and Your
strength, preserve me from every evil circumstance. O God,
cleanse the multitude of my sins. O Lord, grant that I may be
delivered from the snare of the evil one. Save my suffering
soul and illuminate me with the light of Your countenance
when You will come in glory. Now grant that I may fall into a
sleep which is without condemnation and without disturbing
dreams. Keep the mind of Your servant undisturbed, dispelling
from me every satanic action. Enlighten the eyes of my mind
and heart so that I will not fall into a sleep of death. Send me
an angel of peace, a guardian and guide of my soul and body
340

Prayers Before Sleep

that he may deliver me from my enemies, that when I arise
from my bed, I may bring to You prayers of thanksgiving.
Hear me, O Lord, Your sinful and poor servant, made so by my
will and conscience. Grant that when I arise I may meditate
on Your words, and that by Your angels I may drive far from
me all demonic despondency, so that I may glorify and praise
the most holy Theotokos, Mary, whom You gave to us sinners
as an intercessor. For we know that she imitates Your love
for mankind and does not cease to pray for us. Through her
intercession, through the sign of the honorable cross, and for
the sake of all the saints, keep my soul, O Lord Jesus Christ
our God, for You are holy and most glorified forever. Amen.

The Fifth Prayer
O Lord, our God, since You are good and a Lover of
Mankind, forgive the sins which I have committed today by
word, deed, and thought. Give me a peaceful and undisturbed
sleep. Send Your guardian angel to protect and keep me from
all evil. For You are the guardian of our souls and bodies, and
we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever. Amen.

The Sixth Prayer
O Lord, our God, in Whom we believe and Whose Name
we call upon above every other name, grant us, who are about
to sleep, rest of soul and body. Keep us from every disturbance
and dark sensuality. Calm the striving of the passions and
extinguish physical excitements that arise. Grant that we may
lead a chaste life by words and deeds, and upon living a life
of good deeds, we may not fall away from Your promised
blessings, for You are blessed forever. Amen.
341

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Seventh Prayer,
to the Most Holy Theotokos,
of Peter the Studite Monk
I, an accursed person, prostrate myself before you, O most
pure Mother of God, and I pray: “O Queen, you know that I
sin unceasingly and anger your Son and my God.” As many
times as I repent in trembling, wondering if the Lord will
not destroy me, yet after a while, I still do the same things.
Seeing this, my Queen, O Theotokos, I pray: have mercy on
me, strengthen me, and give me a sense of doing good. O
my Lady, Theotokos, you know that I despise my evil actions
and that I love the law of God with my whole mind. I do not
understand the origin of that which I hate, O most pure Lady. I
also love, yet transgress, that which is good. O most pure one,
do not permit me to do my will for that is not good, but rather
let the will of your Son and my God be done, so that He might
save, instruct, and grant me the grace of the Holy Spirit. Thus
from now on, I may cease to do acts of uncleanliness to my
soul, and that I may live the rest of my life according to the
commands of your Son. To Him belong all glory, honor, and
might, with His eternal Father, and His most holy, good, and
life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

The Eighth Prayer,
to the Most Holy Theotokos
O good Mother of the good King, O most pure and blessed
Theotokos, Mary, pour upon my suffering soul the mercy of
your Son and our God. By your prayers guide me to do good
deeds. Grant that I may spend the rest of my life without fault
and attain paradise through you, O Virgin Theotokos; for you
alone are pure and blessed.
342

Prayers Before Sleep

The Ninth Prayer, to the Holy Guardian Angel
O Guardian Angel, protector of my soul and body, to
your care I have been entrusted by Christ. Obtain for me the
forgiveness of the sins committed by me this day. Protect me
from the snares of my enemy that I may never more offend
God by my sin. Pray for me, your sinful and unworthy servant,
that through your help I may become worthy of the grace and
mercy of the most Holy Trinity, and of the Mother of my Lord
God, Jesus Christ, and of all the saints. Amen.
Then, the Kontakion of the Theotokos:
We are yours, O Theotokos. Since you have delivered
us from all tribulations, we give thanks to you by dedicating
our songs of victory to you, O Saving Champion. In your
invincible might, deliver us from all dangers that we may
exclaim to you: Rejoice, full of grace!
Then:
O most glorious, Ever-Virgin Mother of Christ, our God,
offer up our prayers to your Son and our God, so that, through
you He may save our souls.
I place all my hope in you, Mother of God. Protect me
under your patronage.
O Virgin Theotokos, do not turn away from me, a sinner,
for I need your help and intercession. Have mercy on me, for
my soul hopes in you.
Then, the Prayer of Saint Joannicius
The Father is my hope; the Son is my refuge; and the Holy
Spirit is my protection. O Holy Trinity, glory to You!

343

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then: It is truly proper: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have
mercy, Three times. Give the blessing. And the Dismissal:
May the Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the
prayers of Your most pure Mother, of our venerable and Godbearing fathers, and of all the saints, save me, a sinner. Amen.

Prayer of Saint John Damascene
which is to be said while pointing to your bed:
O Master, Lover of Mankind, is this bed to be my grave,
or will You enlighten my wretched soul with another day?
Behold, the grave lies before me; behold, death confronts
me. I fear, O Lord, Your judgment and the endless torments,
yet I do not cease to do evil. My Lord God, I continually
anger You, and Your most pure Mother, and all the heavenly
hosts, and my holy guardian angel. I know, O Lord, that I am
unworthy of Your love for mankind, but am worthy of every
condemnation and torment. But, O Lord, whether I will it or
do not will it, save me. For to save a righteous one is no great
thing, and to have mercy on the pure is nothing wonderful, for
they are worthy of Your mercy. But on me, a sinner, show the
wonder of Your mercy; in this reveal Your love for mankind
lest my wickedness overcome Your ineffable goodness and
merciful kindness, and order my life as You wish.
And when about to lie down in bed,
this:
[Ps. 12: 4, 5] Give light to my eyes, O Christ God, lest I
fall asleep in death, lest my enemies say: “I have overcome
him.”

344

Prayers Before Sleep

Glory:
O God, be the defender of my soul, for I walk through the
midst of many enemies. Deliver me from them, and save me,
O Blessed One, for You love mankind.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Let us with our hearts and lips unceasingly extol the most
glorious Mother of God, holier than the holy angels, and
proclaim that she is truly the Theotokos for she has truly given
birth to God in the flesh and never ceases to intercede for our
souls.
Then kiss your cross, and make the sign of the cross [with
your cross] from the head to the foot of your bed, and likewise
from side to side, saying the Prayer of the Precious Cross:
Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered, and let
those who hate Him flee from before His face. As smoke
vanishes, so let them vanish as wax melts before the fire. So
let the demons perish in the presence of those who love God
and who sign themselves with the sign of the cross and say
in gladness: Rejoice, most precious and life-creating cross of
the Lord, for you drive away the demons by the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ Who was crucified on you, Who descended
to Hades and trampled on the power of the devil, and gave
us you, His precious cross, for the driving away of every
adversary. O most precious and life-creating cross of the
Lord, help me, together with the holy Lady Virgin Theotokos
and with all the saints, forever. Amen.

345

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Before even lying down on your bed, go through all these
in your thoughts and memory.
Firstly, thus:
Give thanks to Almighty God for having given to you,
during the past day, by His grace, to live and to abide in health.
Secondly:
Lay before yourself your words, and make an examination
of your conscience, a thorough and detailed review of all the
hours of the day, beginning from the time when you arose
from your bed, and call to mind: where you went, what you
did: with whom, and on what, did you converse; and all your
deeds, words, and thoughts from morning until evening recite
to yourself, with all fear remembering and examining.
Thirdly:
If you have done any good this day, this has not happened
of you, but of the same God Who gives all good things to us
who fear Him, to Whom be praise and thanksgiving, and pray
that He confirm you in this good and enable you to accomplish
other good things.
Fourthly:
But if you have done anything evil, of yourself and from
your own weakness or from evil habits and arbitrariness which
result in speech, repent and pray to the Lover of Mankind, that
He may will to grant you forgiveness, and with a firm promise
never to do this evil again.

346

Prayers Before Sleep

Fifthly:
With tears implore your gracious Creator to grant that
the present night be quiet, undisturbed, pure, and sinless;
to grant that the coming day may be devoted entirely to the
glorification of His holy Name.
Finally:
If you find a soft pillow, forsake it, and put a stone in its
place for Christ’s sake; if you sleep in winter, bear it patiently,
saying: some did not sleep at all.
Refer: Patericon, Sermon IV.
Then, make the sign of the cross, and with prayer go to
sleep, thinking of the Day of Judgment and of how you shall
have to stand before God.

347

348

The
Canonicon

349

350

Canon of Prayer
to the Most Holy Theotokos
sung in all spiritual afflictions
and in misfortune.

A Composition of the Monk Theostiriktos.
After the blessing of the priest, we begin:

Psalm 142
Lord, listen to my prayer:
turn your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, you are just; give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment.
For no one is just in your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;
he has crushed my life to the ground;
he has made me dwell in darkness
like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;
my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past:
I ponder all your works.
I muse on what your hand has wrought
and to you I stretch out my hands.
351

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Like a parched land my soul thirsts for you.
Lord, make haste and answer;
for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide your face
lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know your love
for I put my trust in you.
Make me know the way I should walk:
to you I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;
I have fled to you for refuge.
Teach me to do your will
for you, O Lord, are my God.
Let your good spirit guide me
in ways that are level and smooth.
For your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;
in your justice save my soul from distress.
In your love make an end of my foes;
destroy all those who oppress me
for I am your servant, O Lord.
Glory: now and ever:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O God! Three
times.
Then:
The Lord is God and has revealed Himself to us; blessed
is He Who comes in the name of the Lord. In the tone of the
troparion.
352

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

Verse 1: Give thanks to the Lord for He is good; for His
love endures forever.
Verse 2: They encircled me, compassed me about; in the
Lord’s name I crushed them.
Verse 3: I shall not die, I shall live and recount the deeds
of the Lord.
Verse 4: The stone which the builders rejected has become
the cornerstone. This is the work of the Lord, a marvel in our
eyes.
Then the Troparion of the Theotokos, Tone 4:
Let us humble sinners now flee with fervor to the
Theotokos. Let us prostrate in repentance and cry out from
the depths of our souls: O Lady, help us and have mercy on us.
Hurry to assist us for we are perishing because of our many
sins. Do not turn us away empty-handed. For you alone we
have as our protectress. Twice.
Glory: now and ever:
Unworthy as we are, we shall never cease to proclaim
your power, O Theotokos. If you no longer intercede for us,
who will deliver us from so many misfortunes? Who will keep
us free in this present moment and always? We shall never
depart from you, O Lady; for you, who alone are the Blessed
One, ever save your servants from every calamity.
Then Psalm 50: Have mercy on me, O God; see page 14.
And
The Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos:
353

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Tone 8. Ode 1.
Irmos. When Israel passed through the waters as upon
dry land, and escaped the malice of the Egyptians, they cried
out: Let us sing to our Redeemer and our God.
Versicle: O most holy Theotokos, save us.
Overwhelmed by many adversities, I turn to you seeking
salvation, O Mother of the Word and Virgin. Save me from
terrible and fierce troubles.
I am confused by the attacks of passions, filling my soul
with great sorrow; calm them down with the tranquility of
your Son and your God, O All-immaculate Maiden.
Glory:
O Virgin, I pray you who gave birth to God the Savior:
help me to be free from my afflictions; for I turn to you today,
directing my soul and thoughts.
Now and ever:
Sick in body and soul, please help me to be visited by
God; I desire your care, the only Mother of God, because you
are merciful and gave birth to the Merciful One.

Ode 3.
Irmos. O Lord, Creator of the vault of the heavens and
Founder of the Church, strengthen me in Your love, summit
of desires and support of the faithful, You alone love mankind.

354

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

The protection and shelter of my life is in you, O Godbearer Virgin; guide me to enter into your harbor. O Cause of
blessings, assurance of the faithful, the only all-praiseworthy
one.
I beg you, O Virgin, to calm the storm of anxiety and
sorrow; You, O Bride of God and the only Most Pure, gave
birth to Christ the Source of Tranquility.
Glory:
You gave birth to the Benefactor, to the Cause of all good.
Pour forth upon everyone the wealth of His blessing. Since
you gave birth to the Almighty Christ, O Lady blessed by
God, you can do all things.
Now and ever:
Help me, O Virgin, exhausted by severe illnesses and
painful passions, for I know you, All-immaculate, as an
inexhaustible and abundant treasury of healing.
This is said after the third and sixth odes only:
[Sessional Hymns]
Save your servants from every danger, O Theotokos, for
after God, we all turn to you for refuge as an unbreachable
wall and protection.
Look mercifully, all-praising Theotokos, on the severe
affliction of my body and heal the sufferings of my soul.

355

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then the priest remembers those for whom this
prayer service is said:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy three times.
Again we pray for our holy father, (Name), Pope of Rome,
and for our most reverend Archbishop and Metropolitan
(Name), for our God-loving Bishop (Name), for those who
serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual
fathers, and for all our brothers and sisters in Christ.
Choir: Lord, have mercy three times.
Again we pray for our government (or our God-protected
King, for health and salvation) and for all in the service of our
country.
Choir: Lord, have mercy three times.
After this petition, those for whom the service is sung:
Let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, God’s
visitation, for the forgiveness of sins, and for the stability of
the servant(s) of God Name(s).
Choir: Lord, have mercy three times.
Again we pray for the people here present who await Your
great and abundant mercy, for those who show us mercy, and
for all Christians of the true faith.
Choir: Lord, have mercy three times.
356

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

Exclamation:
For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind, and we
give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And immediately we say this troparion, Tone 2:
A fervent house of prayer and an insurmountable wall, a
source of mercy, a refuge for the world, we sincerely call to
you: O Lady, Theotokos, hasten and deliver us from disaster,
the only imminent intercessor.

Ode 4.
Irmos. O Lord, I have heard of the mystery of Your work
of salvation. I have meditated on Your deeds, and I have
glorified Your divinity.
You, who gave birth to the Lord, our Helmsman, calm the
embarrassment of my passions and the storm of sins, O Bride
of God.
Grant me, I beseech you, the riches of your mercy; for
you gave birth to the Tender-hearted Merciful One and the
Savior of all, and we sing to you.
Enjoying your gifts, O Most Pure, we glorify you in songs
as the Mother of God.
Glory:
Help me, chained to the bed of my sufferings and
infirmities, O Theotokos, because you are the benevolent and
the only Ever-Virgin.
357

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
We have you, all-praiseworthy, for hope and affirmation,
an inviolable wall of salvation, because by you we are
delivered from all difficulties.

Ode 5.
Irmos. Enlighten us with Your precepts, O Lord, and by
the strength of Your almighty arm, grant peace to the world,
for You alone love mankind.
Fill my heart with joy, O pure one, and give me your
imperishable happiness. You gave birth to the cause of joy.
Deliver us from troubles, O immaculate Theotokos. You
gave birth to eternal Liberation and Peace, Who surpasses all
understanding.
Glory:
O Bride of God, who gave birth to the Divine and Eternal
Light, dispel the darkness of my sins with the light of your
clarity.
Now and ever:
Heal, O Pure One, the weakness of my soul, by granting
us the favor of your visitation, and grant me health by your
prayers.

358

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

Ode 6.
Irmos. I will pour out my supplication to the Lord, and
recount to Him my afflictions, for my soul is filled with evil,
and my life is close to Hades and like Jonah I cry out: O God,
deliver me from destruction.
O Virgin, pray to the Lord and your Son to deliver me
from the wrath of the enemy, for He has given Himself to
death for my nature, engulfed in decay and death, saving us
from death and decay.
I know you as the protector and reliable guardian of my
life, O Virgin, who protects from temptations and repels the
attacks of devils; and I pray always: deliver me from the
affliction of my passions.
Glory:
We have you in all sorrows as a rampart and complete
salvation of souls, O Maiden, and we sincerely rejoice in your
lightness, O Lady, and save us from passions and troubles
today.
Now and ever:
I now lie weak on my bed, and there is no healing for
my body. But to you, the Good One, who gave birth to God
and the Savior of the world and the Deliverer from sickness,
I pray: raise me from the torment of my illness.
After the Sixth Ode as after the Third Ode:

359

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

[Sessional Hymns]
Save your servants from every danger, O Theotokos, for
after God, we all turn for refuge to you as an unbreachable
wall and protection.
Look mercifully, all-praising Theotokos, on the severe
affliction of my body and heal the sufferings of my soul.
Then:
Again and again let us pray to the Lord in peace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us and preserve us, O
God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary with
all the saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ, our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
Exclamation:
For You are the King of Peace and the Savior of our souls,
and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And after the exclamation the Kontakion, Tone 6:
Steadfast Protrectress of Christians, unshakable
Mediatrix before the Creator, do not despise the prayerful
360

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

voices of sinners; but in your goodness hurry to assist those
who faithfully cry out to you. Hasten to intercede and heed
our supplication, interceding always, Theotokos, in behalf of
those who honor you.
Then, if the priest wishes, the Akathist is read.
After the Akathist, the deacon:
Let us be attentive.
Priest: Peace be to all.
Deacon: Wisdom. Be attentive.
And the choir sings the prokeimenon, Tone 4:
I shall make your name remembered in all generations.
Verse: Listen, O daughter, and see and incline your ear.
[Psalm 44:18, 11]
Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
The priest exclaims:
For You are holy, O our God, and You dwell in the holy
place, and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Deacon:
Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to
the Lord. [Psalm 150:6 and 1]
The choir sings: Let everything that lives and that breathes
give praise to the Lord.
361

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And the deacon says the verses:
Verse 1: Praise God in His holy place.
Verse 2: Praise Him in His mighty heaven.
The choir on each verse: Let everything that lives and that
breathes give praise to the Lord.
And after this the deacon exclaims:
That we may be deemed worthy of hearing the holy
gospel, let us pray to the Lord God.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Deacon: Wisdom, let us stand and listen to the holy
gospel.
Priest: Peace be to all.
Choir: And to your spirit.
And immediately: A reading from the holy Gospel
according to Luke.
Choir: Glory to You, O Lord; glory to You!
Deacon: Let us be attentive!
The priest reads the Gospel, pericope 4:
At that time: Mary set out and traveled to the hill
country in haste to a town of Judah where she entered the
house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth. When Elizabeth
heard Mary’s greeting, the infant leaped in her womb, and
Elizabeth, filled with the Holy Spirit, cried out in a loud voice
and said: ‘Most blessed are you among women, and blessed is
the fruit of your womb. And how does this happen to me, that
362

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

the Mother of my Lord should come to me! For the moment
the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my
womb leaped for joy. Blessed are you who believed that what
was spoken to you by the Lord would be fulfilled.’ And Mary
said:
My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord;
My spirit rejoices in God my Savior.
For he has looked upon his handmaid’s lowliness;
Behold, from now on will all generations
call me blessed.
The Mighty One has done great things for me,
and holy is His Name.
Mary remained with her about three months and then
returned to her home.
And immediately:
Glory: Tone 6:
O Father, Word, and Spirit, Holy Trinity, cleanse us of our
many sins.
Now and ever:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Merciful One,
cleanse us of our many sins.
Then:
Have mercy on me, God in Your kindness. In Your
compassion blot out my offense.  [Psalm 50:3]
363

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Tone 6:
O most holy Lady, do not entrust me to any human help,
but receive the prayer of your servant. Distress is all around
me, no longer can I bear the darts of the demons. I have no
shelter and no place to hide. My foes are on all sides, I have no
relief but in you alone! O Queen of the whole world, the hope
and support of all the faithful, turn not away from my prayer,
but do for me whatever is the best.
Deacon:
Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance.
Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the
Christian people of the true faith and send down upon us Your
abundant mercy. Through the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary; through the power of the
precious and life-creating cross; through the protection of the
honorable, heavenly, incorporeal powers; of the honorable,
glorious, Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist, John; of the holy,
glorious, and praiseworthy apostles; (or of the holy apostle
and evangelist Name, and of all the holy, glorious, and
praiseworthy apostles;) and of our fathers among the saints,
the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great,
Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father
among the saints, Nicholas the Wonderworker, archbishop of
Myra in Lycia; of the holy Cyril and Methodius, equals-tothe-apostles, teachers of the Slavs; of the holy well-believing
great prince Vladimir, equal-to-the-apostles; of our holy
Priest-Martyr Josaphat; of the holy, glorious, and victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony
and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves; and of all our
venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous
ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint Name (whose
364

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

church it is), Saint (Name), whose memory we celebrate; and
of all the saints; we pray You, O most merciful Lord, hear us
sinners praying to You, and have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
[The priest] Exclaims:
Aloud: Through the grace and mercies and love for
mankind of your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are
blessed, together with Your all-holy, good, and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

Ode 7.
Irmos: The three youths who came from Judea to Babylon
attained faith in the Holy Trinity. They trampled on the flames
in the furnace and they sang: Blessed are You, O God of our
fathers.
When You, O Savior, chose to save us, You settled in the
womb of the Virgin and revealed her as the intercessor of the
world: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.
O Pure Mother, beseech the Merciful Benefactor, to
Whom you gave birth, to deliver us from sins and defilements,
all who cry out in faith: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.
Glory:
You have shown the one who gave birth to You to be a
treasure of salvation and the source of immortality, the tower
of affirmation and the door of repentance for all who cry out:
Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.
365

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
O Theotokos, who gave birth to the Christ our Savior,
grant healing from the physical weaknesses and illness of
souls to those who come with love under your protection, O
Virgin.

Ode 8.

Irmos. He is the King of heaven Whom the hosts of
angels hymn: praise and exalt Him for all ages.
Do not neglect, O Virgin, those who ask for your help; let
them sing and praise you forever.
The weaknesses of my soul and bodily ailments are healed
by you, O Virgin; I praise you, O Pure One, and glorify you
forever.
Glory:
You pour out the riches of healings on those who sing to
you in faith, O Virgin, and glorify your wondrous birth.
Now and ever:
O Virgin, you dispel the guile of temptations and quell the
assaults of passions; therefore, we sing to you forever.

Ode 9.

Irmos. We truly profess you, O Pure Virgin, as the
Theotokos through whom we have been saved, and with the
angelic choirs, we extol you.
O Virgin, do not turn away from the flowing of my tears
for you gave birth to Christ Who wipes away all tears from
every face.
O Virgin, who received the fullness of joy and who
crushed the sorrow of sin, fill my heart with joy.
366

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

O Virgin, be a haven and a help, an indestructible fortress
and a harbor, a shelter and a joy to those who flee to you.
Glory:
O Virgin, dispel the darkness of unknowing; enlighten
with the radiance of your light those who piously profess you
as the Theotokos.
Now and ever:
Heal me, O Virgin, humbled by the rage of infirmities,
turning sickness into health.
And immediately: It is truly proper to glorify you, O
Theotokos, the ever-blessed, immaculate, and the mother of
our God. More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond
compare more glorious than the seraphim; who, a virgin, gave
birth to God the Word, you, truly the Theotokos, we magnify.
And the priest incenses the altar and the people, and we
sing the appointed Theotokia, Tone 2.
According to: When from the cross:
)
(Jehda ot dreva:
You pray for all, O gracious Lady, for those who run with
faith under Your mighty protection, because we, sinners, have
no other lasting salvation before God in troubles and sorrows,
burdened with innumerable sins, Mother of the Most High
God. Therefore, we prostrate ourselves before you: Deliver
your servants from all calamities.
Verse: I will remember your name forever and ever.
[Ps. 44:18]
367

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O joy of all the afflicted, patroness of the persecuted and
nourisher of the hungry, consoler of strangers, harbor of the
storm-tossed, visitor of the sick, protectress and patroness of
the weak, staff of the aged, O Mother of God on high, you are
most pure, hasten, we pray, that your servants may be saved.
Verse: Listen, O daughter, give ear to my words.
[Ps. 44:11]
Rejoice, Virgin most pure. Rejoice, honored scepter of
Christ the king. Rejoice, from you the mystical Vine sprouted.
Rejoice, gate of heaven and unburnt bush. Rejoice, light of
the whole world. Rejoice, joy of all. Rejoice, salvation of
the faithful. Rejoice, O Lady, Protectress and refuge of all
Christians.
Glory: now and ever: Tone 8.
Rejoice, glory of the whole world. Rejoice, Temple of the
Lord. Rejoice, overshadowed mountain. Rejoice, refuge of all.
Rejoice, golden candelabrum. Rejoice, precious glory of true
believers. Rejoice, Mary, Mother of Christ our God. Rejoice,
Paradise. Rejoice, divine altar. Rejoice, tent of sanctuary.
Rejoice all-golden hand. Rejoice, Hope of all.
Other stichera in the same tone.
According to: House of Ephrata:
(Dome Evfratov:
)
Higher than heaven and more pure than the shining sun,
who delivered us from the curse, we will honor the Queen and
Lady of the world with songs.

368

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

From many of my sins my body is weak, and my soul is
weak; I run to you, O Most Gracious, O hope of the hopeless,
help me.
O Lady and Mother of the Redeemer, accept the prayer
of your unworthy servants and intercede with Him, Who was
born from you; O Queen of the universe, be our mediatrix.
Let us diligently sing to you a song now, to the all-chanted
Theotokos, with joy: pray with the Forerunner and all the
saints, O Lady, to our Savior, that He may have mercy on us.
All angelic powers, Forerunner of the Lord, Twelve
Apostles and all saints with the Theotokos offer prayers to the
Savior to save us.
Then: Trisagion: Most Holy Trinity: Our Father:
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom:
And these troparia, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.

369

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.
After this, the ektenia:
Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Again we pray to the Lord our God, that He may hear the
prayer of us sinners, and have mercy on His servants (Name),
and protect them from every trial and distress, trouble and
sorrow, and from every spiritual and physical pain, bestowing
on them health and a long life; we all pray: quickly hear us
and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
Again, let us pray that He preserve this city (or this
village) and this holy church (although if at a monastery:
this holy monastery) and every city, town, and community
from famine, plague, earthquake, flood, fire, civil war, riot,
and foreign invasion; and that our God Who is kindly and the
Lover of Mankind may forgive our sins and hold back His just
wrath, and that He may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 12.
Again we pray that the Lord our God may hear the prayer
of us sinners, and have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. Three times.
370

Canon of Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos

The priest exclaims:
Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all the ends of the
earth and of those who are far away upon the sea, and be
merciful, be merciful, Master, regarding our sins, and have
mercy on us. For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
The deacon, or the priest:
In humility, bending our necks (and our knees), let us pray
to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.

Prayer to the Mother of God
O our most gracious Queen, O Theotokos, our hope,
friend of orphans, defender of strangers, joy of those in
sorrow, protection of those treated unjustly, look upon our
troubles, look upon our grief, help us in our weakness, guide
us who are strangers; you know our offenses, free us from
them as you wish, for we have no other help but you, no other
defender, no good consoler except you, O Mother of God, for
you guard and protect us forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Wisdom.
Choir: More honorable:
Priest: Glory to You, O Christ God:
Choir: Glory: now and ever: Lord, have mercy. Three
times. Give the blessing.
371

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And the priest gives the dismissal.
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us
through the prayers of His most pure Mother, of our venerable
and God-bearing fathers, and through the prayers of all the
saints, for Christ is good and loves mankind.

372

Akathist Hymn
To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ
At O Lord, I have cried, the stichera of repentance in Tone 6.
According to:Wholly consecrated:
(Vse otloživše:  
)
Sweetest Jesus, O consolation of my soul. My Jesus,
purification of my mind. Master, most-merciful Jesus, save
me. Jesus my Savior, Jesus my all-powerful, do not abandon
me. Jesus my Savior, have mercy on me and deliver me
from every torment; and make me worthy of a portion of the
redeemed, my Jesus; and grant me a share in the choir of Your
chosen ones, O Jesus, O Lover of Mankind.
Sweetest Jesus, glory of apostles. My Jesus, praise of
martyrs. Master, all-powerful Jesus, save me. Jesus my savior,
Jesus my most-beautiful, I run to You. Jesus the Savior, have
mercy on me through the prayers of the one who gave You
birth, of all the prophets, and of all Your saints, Jesus my
Savior, and grant me the joy of the place of delight, Jesus the
Lover of Mankind.
Sweetest Jesus, glory of monks. Jesus long-suffering,
delight and badge of ascetics. Jesus, save me, Jesus my Savior.
Jesus my most-gracious, take me into Your hands. O Savior
Jesus, free me now from the serpent and his traps. From the
pit of hell, Jesus my Savior, and number me among the sheep
at Your right, O Jesus.
373

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Tone 2:
O Theotokos, having given birth to the sweet Jesus, to
Jesus the all-compassionate God, to the Lover of Mankind, to
Jesus Who alone has true pity, intercede of Him to be gracious
to me, poor wretch that I am. Immaculate Lady, beg Him to
free me from the portion of those on His left, and to be worthy
of standing on His right side when He sits to judge the world,
as it is written.
At the Aposticha, Tone 6:
You saved the prodigal son, Jesus my Savior. You accepted
the sinful woman, Jesus my Savior. Now have mercy on me,
Jesus, most merciful. Be compassionate and save me as You
did Manasseh, merciful Jesus, for You love mankind.
I have not obeyed one of Your commandments during
my life. How shall I look You in the face when You sit upon
Your throne as Judge of all? What can I say? How can I stand
trial for all those things I did knowingly or unknowingly,
my Jesus? Therefore, I cry out to You, my Christ, save me, a
sinner, Jesus, through the prayers of Your servants.
Who cannot weep over me who transgressed Your law,
O Jesus? I have gone to hell instead of heaven through my
carelessness. By longing for pleasures, through sensual
delights, I have alienated myself from Your life and glory,
Jesus my Savior. But receive me who repent, for You are the
merciful Lover of Mankind, O my Jesus, for the sake of Your
great mercy.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
374

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

O uniquely pure Virgin, who gave birth to Jesus, I pray to
you: deliver me from the sins of my soul and save me, a dying
being. For you are the hope of the hopeless and the help of
the world. You do as you wish, O Inspiration, for you are the
Mother of the Lord. Despise not my prayer nor forsake me,
all-pure Lady. Save me, for you love mankind.
Then the troparia, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to You, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Glory:
Lord, have mercy on us, for in You we place our hope.
Be not exceedingly angry with us, nor mindful of our
transgressions, but look upon us even now with mercy, and
deliver us from our enemies. For You are our God and we are
Your people: we all are the work of Your hands, and we call
upon Your Name.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Open unto us the doors of mercy, O blessed Theotokos.
Let us not perish who place our trust in you, but rather through
you be delivered from misfortune. For you are the salvation
of all Christians.

375

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Canon of Repentence
to our Lord Jesus Christ
Tone 2. Ode 1.
Irmos. In ancient times the almighty Power overwhelmed
Pharaoh’s army in the deep. When the Word took flesh,
harmful sin was destroyed. The Lord is exceedingly glorious,
and He has been glorified in glory.
Versicle: Sweetest Jesus, save me.
Sweetest Jesus Christ! Jesus longsuffering: heal the
wounds of my soul, O Jesus, and delight of my heart, O Most
Merciful. Being saved by You, I pray and extol You.
Sweetest Jesus Christ! O Jesus, open the door of
repentance to me, O Jesus, Lover of Mankind, and receive
me as I fall before You, fervently beseeching You, O Jesus my
Savior, for the pardon of my sins.
Glory:
Sweetest Jesus Christ! O Jesus, snatch me from the hands
of the deceitful Belial, and grant me to stand at the right hand
of Your glory, O Jesus my Savior, delivering me from the
portion of those at Your left.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Since you have given birth to Jesus our God, O Lady,
pray for us worthless servants, O Most Pure, that through your
prayers, we defiled ones be rescued  from grief and torment, O
Immaculate one, and give us the joy of eternal glory.
376

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

Ode 3.
Irmos. Having established me on the rock of faith, You
have given my words power over my enemies. My spirit
rejoices when it sings: There is none more holy than our God,
and no one is more just than You, Lord.
My Jesus, Lover of Mankind, hear Your servant crying
out to You in sorrow, and deliver me, O Jesus, from damnation
and torment, O only longsuffering, most merciful and sweetest
Jesus.
O Jesus, receive Your servant falling before You with
tears, O my Jesus, and save me, O my Jesus, as I am repentant,
and deliver me from Gehenna, O Master, Sweetest Jesus, and
save me.
Glory:
The time that You gave me, my Jesus, I wasted in the
passions, my Jesus. Therefore, my Jesus, do not reject me, but
call me back, O Master, Sweetest Jesus, and save me.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Virgin who gave birth to my Jesus, pray Him to deliver
me from Gehenna, O only Intercessor of the afflicted, O
all-graced by God, and make me worthy of eternal life, O
immaculate one.

Sessional Hymn, Tone 1.
According to: Your tomb, O Savior:
(Hrob Tvoj, Spase:
)
O Jesus my Savior, You save the prodigal son; O Jesus my
Savior, You accept the sinful woman and now have mercy on
377

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

me; O Jesus Most Merciful, save me and be compassionate to
me as You did to Manasseh, O my Jesus; for You are the only
Lover of Mankind.

Ode 4.
Irmos. You came from the Virgin, not as an angel, nor as
a mediator, but as the incarnate Lord Himself. You saved all
of my humanity, and so I sing to You: Glory to Your power,
O Lord!
Heal, O my Jesus, the wounds of my soul. O my Jesus, I
pray, and snatch me away, O my merciful Jesus, from the hand
of Belial, and save me.
I have sinned, O my Sweetest and Most Merciful Jesus!
O My Jesus, save me, who run to Your shelter, O Jesus
longsuffering, and make me worthy of Your kingdom.
Glory:
No one has sinned, O my Jesus, as I. wretched one, have
sinned; but I kneel down to You, praying: “O my Jesus, save
me, and give me, O my Jesus, the inheritance of life.”
Now and ever: Theotokion:
All-Glorified, who gave birth to Jesus the Lord, pray to
Him to deliver from torment all who sing to you, and who
truly call you the Theotokos.

Ode 5.
Irmos. Illumination of those in darkness, Salvation of
those in despair, I rise early for You, Christ my Savior, King
of peace. Enlighten me by Your radiance. I know of no other
God but You.
378

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

You are enlightenment, O my Jesus, of my mind. You
are the salvation of my desperate soul, O Savior. You, O my
Jesus, deliver me from torment and Gehenna, who cry out:
“Save me, O my Jesus Christ, wretch that I am.”
Defeated completely, O my Jesus, in dishonorable
passions, now I cry: You, O my Jesus, stretching out a helping
hand to me, take me out of these passions, proclaiming: “Save
me, O my Jesus Christ, wretch that I am.”
Glory:
My mind is defiled, yet I call to You, Jesus. Wash me
clean of the defilement of sin, and deliver me from ignorance,
for I have fallen into the abyss of vice. I implore You to save
me, Jesus my Savior!
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Maiden Theotokos, you gave birth to Jesus. Implore
Him to save all the orthodox, all monks, and cenobites. Have
Him deliver from Gehenna all who sing: Beside you we know
no other constant intercessor.

Ode 6.
Irmos. Floundering in a whirlpool of sin, I invoke the
unfathomable depth of Your tender compassion. O God, lead
me away from corruption.
My Jesus, most merciful Christ, accept me as I confess,
Jesus my Master. Rescue me from corruption and save me, O
Jesus.

379

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O my Jesus, no one else was a passionate prodigal such as
I am, O Jesus Lover of mankind; But You, O my Jesus, save
me.
Glory:
I have surpassed the prodigal and the harlot with my
passions, my Jesus. I have outdone Manasseh and the thief,
Jesus. I have been worse than the publican and the Ninevites,
O my Jesus.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O uniquely undefiled Lady and most pure Virgin, you
gave birth to my Jesus Christ. I am defiled. Now cleanse me
with the hyssop of your prayers.

Kontakion One, Tone Eight:
Unconquered King and Lord, Vanquisher of the Nether
World, I, Your creature and servant, sing Your praise for
having delivered me from eternal death. Since Your mercies
are boundless, free me from every harm as I sing: O Jesus,
Son of God, have mercy on me!

Ikos One:
Creator of Angels and Lord of Angelic Hosts: as You
once opened the ears of the deaf and the mouths of the dumb,
empower my dull mind and tongue to sing to You:
O Jesus, most wonderful, the Astonishment of Angels!
O Jesus, most powerful, the Deliverer of our Forefathers!
O Jesus, most delightful, the Exaltation of Patriarchs!
O Jesus, most glorious, the Stronghold of Kings!
O Jesus, most beloved, the Fulfillment of Prophets!
380

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

O Jesus, most marvelous, the Strength of Martyrs!
O Jesus, most peaceful, the Joy of Monks!
O Jesus, most gracious, the Delight of Priests!
O Jesus, most merciful, the Abstinence of Pastors!
O Jesus, most tender, the Happiness of Saints!
O Jesus, most honorable, the Chastity of the Chaste!
O Jesus, Everlasting Salvation of Sinners!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Two:
When You saw the widow weeping by the body of her
dead son, O Lord, You were moved to compassion and raised
him from the dead. O Lover of Mankind, have mercy also
upon me, and raise up my sin-tortured soul, that I may sing:
Alleluia!

Ikos Two:
As he sought to understand, Philip, in his confusion,
said: “Lord, show us the Father.” In answer, You told him:
“Have I been so long a time with you and you have not known
that the Father is in Me and I am in the Father?” Likewise,
incomparable Lord, I cry out with fear:
O Jesus, Eternal God!
O Jesus, All-Powerful King!
O Jesus, Long-suffering Master!
O Jesus, All-Merciful Savior!
O Jesus, my gracious Guardian!
O Jesus, cleanse my sins!
O Jesus, take away my iniquities!
O Jesus, pardon my unrighteousness!
O Jesus, my Hope, forsake me not!
381

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Jesus, my Helper, reject me not!
O Jesus, my Creator, forget me not!
O Jesus, my Shepherd, lose me not!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Three:
O Jesus, Who bestowed heavenly power upon the
apostles waiting in Jerusalem: fill me, who am deprived of all
goodness, with Your Holy Spirit, so that I may lovingly sing
to You: Alleluia!

Ikos Three:
O Jesus endowed with a richness of compassion: You
called the publicans, the unfaithful, and the sinners to You.
Do not despise me, who am like them, but rather, receive this
song as a gift of precious perfume:
O Jesus, Invincible Power!
O Jesus, Infinite Mercy!
O Jesus, Radiant Beauty!
O Jesus, Unspeakable Love!
O Jesus, Son of the Living God!
O Jesus, have mercy on me, a sinner!
O Jesus, hear me who was conceived in iniquity!
O Jesus, cleanse me who was born in sin!
O Jesus, teach me who am worthless!
O Jesus, enlighten my darkness!
O Jesus, purify me who am unclean!
O Jesus, restore me, a prodigal!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

382

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

Kontakion Four:
With doubts storming within him, Peter began to sink, but
looking up, he saw You walking on the water, and realizing
that You are truly God, and receiving the hand of salvation,
exclaimed: Alleluia!

Ikos Four:
Hearing You as You passed by, the blind man cried out:
“Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me”; and You, by calling
out to him, opened his eyes. Likewise, in Your mercy, open
the eyes of my soul, that I may cry out to You:
O Jesus, Creator of those on high!
O Jesus, Redeemer of those below!
O Jesus, Vanquisher of the powers of hell!
O Jesus, Adorner of every creature!
O Jesus, Comforter of my soul!
O Jesus, Enlightener of my mind!
O Jesus, Gladness of my heart!
O Jesus, Health of my body!
O Jesus, my Savior, save me!
O Jesus, my Light, enlighten me!
O Jesus, deliver me from all torments!
O Jesus, save me despite my unworthiness!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Five:
Through the shedding of Your Divinely-shed Blood, we
were freed from the just curse of old. O Jesus, in like manner,
free us now from the torments of our evil passions, and from
prodigal rebellion and sinful despair with which the serpent
defiled us, so that we may sing to You: Alleluia!
383

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ikos Five:
The Jewish children, seeing their Creator incarnate as
Man, and recognizing Him as their Lord, hastily cut branches
to honor Him, crying out: “Hosanna!” We also offer You this
song:
O Jesus, true God!
O Jesus, Son of David!
O Jesus, Most Glorious King!
O Jesus, Innocent Lamb!
O Jesus, Marvelous Shepherd!
O Jesus, Guardian of my Childhood!
O Jesus, Provider of my Youth!
O Jesus, Praise of my Old Age!
O Jesus, My Hope at Death!
O Jesus, My Life after Death!
O Jesus, My Comfort at the Last Judgment!
O Jesus, My Desire, do not cast me off!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Six:
Fulfilling the prophesies and messages of the inspired
prophets, Jesus appeared on earth. Omnipresence lived with
men and took upon Himself our weaknesses. And we, being
healed by Your wounds, have learned to sing: Alleluia!

Ikos Six:
The light of Your truth shines forth throughout the entire
universe and destroys the falsehoods of the devil. Idols, being
no match for Your power, O Savior, fall down before You.
And we, who have received salvation, sing to You:
384

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

O Jesus, the Truth, dispelling falsehood!
O Jesus, the Light above all lights!
O Jesus, the King, surpassing all in strength!
O Jesus, God, constant in mercy!
O Jesus, Bread of Life, fill me who am hungry!
O Jesus, Source of Knowledge, refresh me who am thirsty!
O Jesus, Garment of Gladness, clothe my nakedness!
O Jesus, Veil of Joy, cover my unworthiness!
O Jesus, Giver to those who ask, give me sorrow for
my sins!
O Jesus, Finder of those who seek, find my soul!
O Jesus, Opener to those who knock, open my
wretched heart!
O Jesus, Redeemer of sinners, wash away my sins!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Seven:
Desiring the precious mystery revealed from the beginning
of time, You were led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as an
innocent lamb, You were silent before the shearers. As God,
You rose from the dead, and with glory, You ascended into
heaven, so that we exalted might sing to You: Alleluia!

Ikos Seven:
Marvelous creation beheld the appearance of the Creator,
Who was born without seed from a Virgin, Who triumphantly
arose from a sealed grave, and Who physically came to the
Apostles through locked doors. And we, being likewise
astonished, now sing:
O Jesus, Inexplicable Word!
O Jesus, Incomparable Word!
385

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Jesus, Unconquered Strength!
O Jesus, Indescribable Divinity!
O Jesus, Lord Over All!
O Jesus, Invincible Kingdom!
O Jesus, Unending Sovereignty!
O Jesus, Omnipotent One!
O Jesus, Eternal Power!
O Jesus, My Creator, look graciously upon me!
O Jesus, My Savior, save me!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Eight:
Seeing God wondrously incarnate, let us cast out the
foolishness of the world and turn our minds to the divine; for
the undreamed-of has happened, and God has become man
in order to lead us to heaven, so that we might sing to Him:
Alleluia!

Ikos Eight:
You were always associated with the lowly. Though
incomparably greater than the mighty and wise, You never
sought their company. When You willingly suffered for us,
You conquered Death by Your death, and by Your resurrection,
You gave life to those who sing:
O Jesus, Sweetness of the heart!
O Jesus, Strength of the body!
O Jesus, Purity of the soul!
O Jesus, Brightness of the mind!
O Jesus, Gladness of the conscience!
O Jesus, Sure Hope!
O Jesus, Memory Eternal!
O Jesus, High Praise!
386

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

O Jesus, my most exalted Glory!
O Jesus, my Desire, reject me not!
O Jesus, my Shepherd, recover me!
O Jesus, my Savior, save me!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Nine:
All the angelic choirs unceasingly glorify Your most holy
Name, O Jesus, singing in the heavens: Holy, Holy, Holy.
Likewise, we sinners here on earth sing out with earthly lips:
Alleluia!

Ikos Nine:
We see most eloquent orators voiceless as fish when they
must speak of You, O Jesus our Savior. For it is beyond their
power to tell how You are both perfect man and immutable
God at the same time. We likewise, amazed, sing to You with
faith:
O Jesus, Eternally God!
O Jesus, King of kings!
O Jesus, Lord of lords!
O Jesus, Judge of the living and the dead!
O Jesus, Hope of the hopeless!
O Jesus, Comforter of those who weep!
O Jesus, Glory of the lowly!
O Jesus, do not judge me according to my deeds!
O Jesus, cleanse me according to Your mercy!
O Jesus, let me not despair!
O Jesus, enlighten my spiritual powers!
O Jesus, keep before me the idea of death!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
387

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion Ten:
Wishing to save the world, O Sunrise of the East, You
come to the dark occident of our nature, and humble Yourself
even to the point of death. Therefore Your Name is exalted
above every name, and from all the tribes of earth and heaven,
You hear: Alleluia!

Ikos Ten:
Eternal King, True Comforter, True Christ: cleanse us
from all sinfulness as You cleansed the ten lepers. Heal us
also as You healed the greedy soul of Zacchaeus the publican,
that we may cry to You with compunction, saying:
O Jesus, Treasury of immortality!
O Jesus, Abundance of riches!
O Jesus, Food which is strong!
O Jesus, Fount Inexhaustible!
O Jesus, Garment of the poor!
O Jesus, Defender of widows!
O Jesus, Protector of orphans!
O Jesus, Aid to all those who labor!
O Jesus, Protection of travelers!
O Jesus, Guide of seafarers!
O Jesus, Calmer of tempests!
O Jesus, raise me up who have fallen!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Eleven:
Though unworthy, I bring to You tenderest songs and like
the woman of Canaan, I cry to You: O Jesus, have mercy on
me! For it is not my daughter, but my flesh violently possessed
with passions and burning with fury. So grant healing to me,
who sing to You: Alleluia!
388

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

Ikos Eleven:
A glowing beacon for those who dwell in the darkness
of ignorance, Paul persecuted You until he was quelled by
the power of Your voice and enlightened quickly by Your
heavenly words. In like manner, enlighten the darkened eyes
of my soul as I sing:
O Jesus, my King most powerful!
O Jesus, my God Almighty!
O Jesus, my Immortal Master!
O Jesus, my Creator most glorious!
O Jesus, my most kind Teacher and Guide!
O Jesus, my most Gentle Pastor!
O Jesus, my Lord most compassionate!
O Jesus, my Savior most merciful!
O Jesus, enlighten my senses darkened by passions!
O Jesus, heal my body scabbed with sins!
O Jesus, cleanse my mind from vain thoughts!
O Jesus, keep my heart from evil desires!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Twelve:
Grant me Your grace, O Jesus, Absolver of all debts, and
receive me who repent, as You received Peter who denied
You, and call me who am downcast, as You earlier called Paul
who persecuted You, and hear me crying to You: Alleluia!

Ikos Twelve:
Singing of Your Incarnation, we all praise You and
believe like Thomas that, sitting together with the Father, You
are Lord and God, and the Judge of the Living and the Dead.
389

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Allow me to stand at Your right hand and sing:
O Jesus, my Eternal King, have mercy on me!
O Jesus, Aroma of Flowers, shed Your perfume on me.
O Jesus, warming Love, enkindle me!
O Jesus, eternal Temple, shelter me.
O Jesus, Cloak of Light, cover me!
O Jesus, Brilliant Pearl, shine upon me!
O Jesus, Precious Stone, illumine me!
O Jesus, Sun of Holiness, illumine me!
O Jesus, Joyful Light, inspire me!
O Jesus, deliver me from all bodily and spiritual ills!
O Jesus, spare me from falling into the hands of evildoers!
O Jesus, free me from eternal fire and torment!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!

Kontakion Thirteen:
O most sweet and most generous Jesus! Receive this our
humble prayer, as You received the widow’s mite and keep
Your faithful people from all enemies, visible and invisible,
from foreign invasion, from disease and hunger, from all
tribulations and mortal wounds, and deliver from future
torments all who cry to You: Alleluia!
This Kontakion is said three times.
And again read the First Ikos:
Creator of Angels and Lord of Angelic Hosts: as You
once opened the ears of the deaf and the mouths of the dumb,
empower my dull mind and tongue to sing to You:

390

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

O Jesus, most wonderful, the Astonishment of Angels!
O Jesus, most powerful, the Deliverer of our Forefathers!
O Jesus, most delightful, the Exaltation of Patriarchs!
O Jesus, most glorious, the Stronghold of Kings!
O Jesus, most beloved, the Fulfillment of Prophets!
O Jesus, most marvelous, the Strength of Martyrs!
O Jesus, most peaceful, the Joy of Monks!
O Jesus, most gracious, the Delight of Priests!
O Jesus, most merciful, the Abstinence of Pastors!
O Jesus, most tender, the Happiness of Saints!
O Jesus, most honorable, the Chastity of the Chaste!
O Jesus, Everlasting Salvation of Sinners!
O Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
And again the First Kontakion:
Unconquered King and Lord, Vanquisher of the Nether
World, I, Your creature and servant, sing Your praise for
having delivered me from eternal death. Since Your mercies
are boundless, free me from every harm as I sing: O Jesus,
Son of God, have mercy on me!

Ode 7.
Irmos. When the golden idol was worshiped on the Plain
of Dura, the three youths ignored the command to sin. Cast
into the very center of a furnace, they were showered with
dew. They sang: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.
O Christ Jesus, no one on earth in any age has sinned as I
have sinned, O my Jesus. Therefore, I call to You, O my Jesus,
O Christ, have mercy on me as I sing: Blessed are You, O God
of our fathers.
391

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O Christ Jesus, I cry: Nail me down with the fear of You,
O my Jesus, and pilot me to Your calm haven now, O my
compassionate Jesus, so that as one saved, I may sing to You:
Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.
Glory:
O Christ Jesus, ten thousand times have I, the passionate
one, promised You repentance, O my Jesus, but wretch that
I am, I deceived You. Therefore, I cry to You, my Jesus:
Enlighten my soul which remains unfeeling: O Christ, the
God of our fathers, blessed are You.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You gave birth to Jesus in a wondrous way that was
sublime. Ever pray to Him, Immaculate Lady, to forgive all
my terrible sins against nature, so that when I am saved, I can
sing: Blessed are you who gave birth to Christ in the flesh.

Ode 8.
Irmos. For God has descended into a fiery furnace. He
went down to the Hebrew youths, and turned the flame into
dew. Let us sing, all you works of the Lord, and exalt Him
above all, forever.
O my Jesus, I beg You, as You delivered the sinful woman
from a multitude of sins, deliver me, also, O Jesus. O Jesus,
my Christ, cleanse the impurity of my soul, O my Jesus.
O Jesus, having yielded to irrational pleasures, I have
become irrational, O my Jesus; and wretch that I am, I have
truly become like the beasts, O Savior. Therefore, O Jesus,
deliver me from irrationality.
392

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

Glory:
Having fallen, O Jesus, into the hands of soul-corrupting
thieves, I have been stripped now of my divinely-woven
garment, O my Jesus, and I am lying all bruised with wounds.
O my Christ, pour on me oil and wine.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos Mary, you gave birth to my Jesus and my
God in a mysterious way. Ever pray to Christ to save your
servants and those who sing to you from misfortune, O Virgin
inviolate.

Ode 9.
Irmos. God the Word, Who came forth from God, and
Who by ineffable wisdom came to renew Adam after his
grievous fall to corruption through eating, and Who ineffably
took flesh from the Holy Virgin for our sake, Him do we the
faithful with one accord magnify with hymns.
I have surpassed Manasseh, the publican, the harlot, the
prodigal, and the thief, my Jesus, by my wanton and perverted
deeds. O compassionate Jesus, but do forestall me, O my
Jesus, and save me.
By my passions, O my Jesus, have I, the wretched one,
surpassed all those from Adam who have sinned both before
the Law and in the Law, O Jesus, and after the Law and Grace,
O my Jesus. But by Your judgments save me, O my Jesus.
Glory:
May I not be cast from Your mystical glory, O Jesus. May
I not be herded onto the left side, sweetest Jesus. May I be
393

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

given the restful joy at Your right side, O Jesus my Christ, the
merciful One.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Only pure and immaculate Virgin Mary, O Theotokos
who have borne Jesus, implore Him to save those who hasten
to you  from danger, temptation, and future fire, since He is
your Son and your Creator.

Hymn of Light:
O Jesus, Giver of wisdom and understanding, Nourisher
of beggars, Protector of orphans, Physician of those in pain,
heal and illumine my heart, O Jesus, which is covered with
the scars of sins and the wounds of passions, O Jesus, and
save me.

Theotokion:
Illumine my mind with the brilliance which radiated from
you, Virgin. Enlighten my heart. Dispel the sinful darkness,
and drive away the gloom of laziness.
At the stichera at the Praises, Tone 4:
Jesus our Savior, the angels in heaven sing Your wondrous
Name, and we sinners on earth praise Your Name with mouths
of clay so that You may have mercy on us.
Your Name is most honored, O Savior, where You sit at
the right of the Father, yet here on earth Your immaculate
incarnation is glorified. But those in hell who see Your descent
are shamed. O Christ God, deliver us from them and save us.
394

Akathist Hymn To Our Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ

Habakkuk perceived with fear Your wonderous deeds in a
vision. With the passage of years, O Jesus, You were revealed
to prodigals and thieves. Yet, wretch that I am, I remain in
slothfulness, but perhaps from now on you might give me
understanding and fear of You, O Compassionate One, and
great mercy.
Glory: Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, you are a strong deliverer of those who hope
in you; lead me to the quiet haven of divine desire through
your maternal courage that you have for your Son, O Bride
of God.

Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ
To You, O Lord, the only Good One Who do not remember
evils, I confess my sins; I fall down before You, unworthy as I
am, crying out: I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I am
not worthy to look upon the height of heaven because of the
multitude of my iniquities. But, my Lord, O Lord, grant me
tears of compunction, You Who alone are good and merciful,
so that with them I may entreat You to cleanse me of all sin
before the end, for the place that I must pass through when I
have separated from this body is frightful and terrible, and a
multitude of dark and inhuman demons await me, and there is
no one to come to my help or to deliver me. For this reason,
I fall down before your goodness: do not deliver me up to
those who wrong me, nor let my enemies triumph over me, O
Good Lord, nor let them say: ‘you have come into our hands,
and you have been delivered up unto us.’ Neither, O Lord,
forget Your compassions, and do not render to me according
to my iniquities, and do not turn Your countenance away from
me, but do You, O Lord, chasten me—but with mercy and
395

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

compassion, and do not let my enemy rejoice over me but
quench his threatening against me and bring to nothing all his
deeds. And grant me an unsullied way to You, O Good Lord,
because, having sinned, I have not had recourse to any other
physician, and have not stretched out my hands to a strange
god. Therefore, do not reject my supplication, but hear me
in Your goodness, and strengthen my heart in Your fear, and
let Your grace be upon me, O Lord, like a fire consuming the
impure thoughts within me. For You, O Lord, are the Light
above all lights, the Joy above all joys, the Repose above all
repose, and the Salvation that remains forever and ever. Amen.

396

Akathist to the Most Blessed Lady,
the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary
Akathist Hymn
to the Most Holy Theotokos
At O Lord, I have cried, the stichera in Tone 6.
According to:Wholly consecrated:
)
(Vse otloživše:  
Gabriel stood before you, O Maiden, revealing the plan
from of old. He greeted you and said: Rejoice, Unsown Land;
rejoice, Unburnt Bush; rejoice, Unfathomable Depth; rejoice,
Bridge leading to heaven and Ladder raised on high whom
Jacob saw; rejoice, Divine Jar of Manna; rejoice, Release
from the curse; rejoice, Restoration of Adam, the Lord is with
you.
The inviolate Maiden said to the angelic Commander:
You appear to me as a man but what you say to me is beyond
human words, for you are telling me that God will be with me
and that He will dwell in my womb. Tell me, how can I become
the spacious container and holy temple of the One Who is
borne aloft on the cherubim? Do not entice me deceitfully, for
I have never known pleasure, nor have I experienced wedlock.
How then shall I bear a child?
The bodiless one said: Whenever God so wills, the order of
nature is overcome, and supernatural things are accomplished.
Believe that what I say is true, all-holy and all-spotless one.
She cried out: Let it be done to me according to your word and
397

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

I will give birth to the fleshless One Who borrows flesh from
me, for He alone is able, by sharing in it, to restore human
nature to its ancient dignity.
Glory: now and ever: Tone 2:
[composed by Theophanes]
The eternal mystery is revealed today. The Son of God
becomes Son of man. By sharing what is imperfect, He
makes me share what is perfect. Of old, Adam disobeyed; he
wished to become God, but failed. Now God becomes man
that He might make Adam god. Let creation rejoice, let nature
sing for joy: for the Archangel stands before the Virgin with
great respect and greets her with good news that takes away
our sorrow. O our God, Who took flesh in Your merciful
compassion, glory to You!
At the aposticha, Tone 1:
According to: The ranks of heaven:
(Nebesnych Činov:  

)

Gabriel flew down from the vault of heaven and came to
Nazareth. Standing before the Virgin Mary, he cried to her:
Rejoice! You shall conceive a Son, more ancient than Adam,
the Maker of all things and the Deliverer of those who cry to
you: Rejoice, pure Virgin.
Verse: Hear, O daughter, and see, and incline your ear.
Gabriel brought from heaven good tidings to the Virgin,
and he cried out to her: Rejoice! You shall conceive in your
womb Him Whom the world cannot contain, Who yet shall
be contained in you; and you shall be the bearer of Him Who
shone forth from the Father before the Morning Star.
398

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Verse: The wealthy will seek your aid.
The co-eternal Word of the Father without beginning, not
being parted from the things on high, has now descended here
below, in His infinite compassion taking pity upon fallen men;
and assuming the poverty of Adam, He has put on a form that
is alien to Him.
Verse: Let all the earth bow to you, and sing to you.
Eternally from the Father, and in time from a mother, the
ever-subsisting Word revealed Himself to the world. He took
on the form of a slave. He became flesh, without losing His
divinity. He was conceived in a womb without seed and He
raises Adam.
Glory: now and ever: Tone 2:
[composed by Cosmas the Monk]
Gabriel today announces the good tidings to her who is
full of grace: Hail, O unwedded Maiden who have not known
marriage. Be not struck with dismay by my strange form, nor
be afraid. I am an archangel. Once the serpent beguiled Eve,
but now I announce to you the good tidings of joy, O Most
Pure, you shall remain a virgin and yet shall bear the Lord.
Then the troparion, Tone 8:
When he grasped the meaning of the mystical command,
the bodiless one stood instantly in Joseph’s tent. He said to the
woman who knew not wedlock: He Who bowed the heavens
when He came down is contained entirely in you without
change. Seeing Him in your womb taking the form of a slave,
I am amazed as I exclaim: Rejoice, O Unwedded Bride.
399

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

A CANON OF THANKSGIVING TO THE MOST
HOLY THEOTOKOS
Which has this foundation verse:
Harbor of joy, rejoicing is due to you alone.

A Composition of Joseph.
Tone 4. Ode 1.
Irmos. I will open my mouth. It will be filled by the
Spirit, and I will offer words of praise to the Queen Mother. I
will celebrate solemnly in radiance. In rejoicing, I will sing of
these wonders.
When the great Archangel saw you, O immaculate one, as
the living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit, he cried unto
you: Rejoice, vessel of joy, through whom the curse of our
first-mother is loosed.
Rejoice, O virgin bride of God, the uplifter of Adam and
death-knell of Hades; rejoice, O all-blameless one, the palace
of the only King; rejoice, the fiery throne of the Almighty.
Glory:
Rejoice, the Unwithering Rose; Rejoice, who bear the
fragrant Apple; rejoice, for you gave birth to the agreeable
fruit and the fragrant aroma of our King; rejoice, O bride and
maiden ever pure, who brings salvation to the world.
Now and ever:
400

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Rejoice, treasury of purity, who raises us up when we had
fallen; rejoice royal lily, whose fragrance fills the faithful;
rejoice, sweet-smelling incense and most precious perfume.

Ode 3.
Irmos. O Theotokos, life-giving source of blessings, grant
strength to those united in faith who sing hymns of praise to
you. In your glory, grant them the crowns of victory.
You have made the wheat of heaven spring up in the
untilled field; rejoice, mystical table who bore the Bread of
Life; rejoice, sovereign Virgin, never-failing spring of lifegiving water.
Rejoice, for you gave birth to the Victim without blemish;
rejoice, Mother of the Lamb Who takes away the sin of the
world; rejoice, fervent mediator.
Glory:
Rejoice, brilliant dawn, who alone bore Christ our Sun;
rejoice, tabernacle of the Light, Who dispelled the darkness
of death and dispersed the gloom of demons.
Now and ever:
Rejoice, only gate through whom the Word alone has
passed; by giving birth, O Virgin, you shattered the gates
and bolts of Hades; rejoice divine entryway of the redeemed
people, O Virgin.

Ode 4.
Irmos. Jesus, the true God, Who sits in glory upon the
divine throne, now appears riding on a swift cloud; and with
his pure hand He saves those who cry: Glory to Your power,
O Christ.
401

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

With our hymns and our voices, we, the faithful, sing to
you, O Virgin, worthy of our praise; Rejoice, fertile mountain,
uplifted by the Spirit; rejoice, golden candlestick and vessel
containing the manna, savory sweetness for the faithful.
Rejoice, intercessor for the world and most pure Queen;
rejoice, ladder leading from earth to grace; rejoice, bridge
leading from death to life all the faithful who honor you with
their hymns.
Higher than the heavens, in your womb you held the
earth’s Pillar and Foundation, and you did not suffer pains of
childbirth, O Maiden. Rejoice, O sea-shell that dipped in your
own pure blood the purple robe dyed for the King of heaven.
Glory:
Rejoice, for you gave birth to our Lawgiver, O Queen; He
freely wiped out our sins; rejoice, unfathomable ocean, and
indescribable peak; unwedded spouse through whom we are
deified.
Now and ever:
For the world, you have woven a crown not made by
human hands; we sing to you and cry out: Rejoice, holy
Virgin and protectress of all, unshakeable rampart, fortress
and sacred refuge.

Ode 5.
Irmos. All nations marveled at your divine glory, for you,
O Virgin who have not known wedlock, carried within your
womb the God of all, the eternal Son to Whom you gave birth;
He grants salvation to all who sing your praises.
402

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Rejoice, for you gave birth to the Way of Life; rejoice,
for you saved the world from the deluge of sin; rejoice, Bride
of God, hearing and speaking about Whom thrills; rejoice,
dwelling of the Creator and Lord.
Rejoice, most pure one, fortress and rampart of humans;
rejoice, abode of glory and dread of Hades; rejoice splendor
of virgins and joy of the angels in heaven; rejoice, protectress
of the faithful who call upon you.
Rejoice, fiery chariot of the divine Word; rejoice, Queen
and mystical Paradise, in whose midst the Lord becomes
the new Tree of life, Whose sweetness takes the place of the
bitterness of death for the faithful who eat its life-giving fruit.
Glory:
Strengthened by your power, we cry out in faith: Rejoice,
city of the great King; those who speak of you, worthily
glorify you; rejoice, unfathomable abyss and uncut mountain.
Now and ever:
Rejoice, spacious tabernacle of the Word of God; rejoice,
most pure one, for you have fashioned the divine jewel;
rejoice, unparalleled wonder; you reconcile with God those
who always proclaim you blessed, O Theotokos.

Ode 6.
Irmos. Come, O you faithful, and clap your hands as we
celebrate this holy and solemn feast of the Theotokos. Glorify
Him Who was born of her.

403

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Rejoice, nuptial chamber of the divine Word, the reason
for the deification of us all; rejoice, O immaculate Virgin,
about whom the prophets have heard; rejoice, adornment of
the apostles.
The dew has fallen from you, the flame of polytheism has
extinguished, therefore we cry to you: “Rejoice, Virgin, the
watered fleece, which Gideon contemplated in advance!”
Glory:
For us who sing to you: Rejoice, be a peaceful harbor in
the midst of the waters, a refuge in the ocean of tribulations,
and a shelter against the deceits of the Enemy.
Now and ever:
O cause of our joy, become a pier for us, who are sailing
on the sea; give us the wisdom to sing to you: Rejoice, bush
that burns without being consumed; rejoice, bright cloud
covering the faithful with its never-ending shadow.
After this the Kontakia and Ikosi to the Theotokos in Tone 8:

Kontakion One:
To you, our defender and leader in battle, O Theotokos,
we your servants, delivered from our sufferings, offer hymns
of victory and thanksgiving. But you, invincible in power, set
us free from every peril, that we may cry to you: “Rejoice, O
Bride and Maiden ever-pure!”

404

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Ikos One:
An Archangel was sent from heaven to greet the
Theotokos, and as he saw You assuming a body at the sound
of his bodiless voice, O Lord, he stood rapt in amazement and
cried to her in these words:
Rejoice, O you through whom joy will shine forth;
rejoice, O you through whom the curse will disappear!
Rejoice, O Restoration of the fallen Adam;
rejoice, O Redemption of the tears of Eve!
Rejoice, O Height beyond the reach of human thought;
rejoice, O Depth, impenetrable even for angelic eyes!
Rejoice, O you who have become a kingly throne;
rejoice, O you who carry Him Who carries all!
Rejoice, O Star who manifest the sun;
rejoice, O Womb of the Divine Incarnation!
Rejoice, O you through whom creation is renewed;
rejoice, O you through whom the Creator is adored!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Two:
The holy one, seeing herself in all her purity, says to
Gabriel boldly: “Your strange words seem difficult for my soul
to accept; for how do you speak of a birth from a conception
without seed, exclaiming: Alleluia!”

Ikos Two:
Trying to grasp the meaning of this mystery, the Virgin
asked the holy messenger: “How is it possible that a son be
born from a virginal womb? Tell me.” And he answered her
with awe, crying out in these words:

405

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Rejoice, O Hidden sense of the ineffable plan;
rejoice, O Belief in that which must be guarded by silence!
Rejoice, O Beginning of the miracles of Christ;
rejoice, O Crown and fulfilment of His teachings!
Rejoice, O Celestial Ladder by whom God came down;
rejoice, O Bridge leading earthly ones to heaven!
Rejoice, O Wonder, ever-thrilling to the angels;
rejoice, O Wound, ever-hurting to the demons!
Rejoice, O you who gave birth to Light ineffably;
rejoice, O you who told no one how it was done!
Rejoice, O you who surpass the wisdom of the wise;
rejoice, O you who enlighten faithful minds!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Three:
When the power of the Most High overshadowed the
one who had never known the nuptial bed, her fruitful womb
conceived, and she became for all a delicious field for those
who wished to reap salvation by singing: Alleluia!

Ikos Three:
Bearing God within her womb, the Virgin hastened
to Elizabeth, and her unborn child rejoiced, immediately
knowing her embrace. Leaping up as if in song, he cried out
to the Theotokos:
Rejoice, O Branch of the Everlasting Sprout;
rejoice, O Soil of Immortal Fruit!
Rejoice, O Tender of mankind’s loving Tender;
rejoice, O you who gave birth to the Gardener of Life!
Rejoice, O Field who yielded a rich harvest of mercies;
rejoice, O Table full-laden with appeasement!
Rejoice, for you have greened anew the pastures of delight;
406

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

rejoice, for you have prepared a haven for the souls!
Rejoice, acceptable incense of prayer;
rejoice, Expiation of the whole universe!
Rejoice, O Favor of God to mortal men;
rejoice, O Trust of mortals before God!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Four:
Filled with a storm of contradictory thoughts, the wise
Joseph was greatly disturbed: until then, he had seen you a
virgin, and now he suspected you of secret guilt, AllBlameless One! Learning that your conception was of the
Holy Spirit, he cried out: Alleluia!

Ikos Four:
The shepherds heard the angels singing hymns of praise
to the coming of Christ in the flesh. And running to Him as
to a shepherd, they saw Him as a spotless Lamb grazing at
Mary’s breast. They sang a hymn to her and said:
Rejoice, O Mother of Lamb and Shepherd;
rejoice, O Fold of rational sheep!
Rejoice, O Protection against unseen foes;
rejoice, O Key to the doors of paradise!
Rejoice, for the heavenly rejoice with the earthly;
rejoice, for the earthly meet the heavenly in song!
Rejoice, the unsilenced voice of Apostles;
rejoice, the undaunted might of martyrs!
Rejoice, O Steadfast Foundation of faith;
rejoice, O Shining Emblem of grace!
Rejoice, O you through whom hell has been laid bare;
rejoice, O you through whom we were clothed with glory!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!
407

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion Five:
When the Magi saw the Star moved by God, they followed
its glittering light. Using it as a beacon, they found through it
the Mighty King; and reaching the One Beyond All Reach,
they rejoiced and cried out to Him: Alleluia!

Ikos Five:
The sons of Chaldea saw in the Virgin’s hands the One
Whose hands had fashioned men: and acknowledging Him as
the Master, although He had taken the form of a servant, they
hastened to honor Him with their gifts, and cried out to the
Blessed One:
Rejoice, O Mother of the Star without setting;
rejoice, O Radiance of the mystical day!
Rejoice, O you who quenched the flame of deception;
rejoice, O Light of those who search the Trinity!
Rejoice, O you who unthroned the enemy of men;
rejoice, O you who showed us Christ the Lord, the
Lover of Mankind!
Rejoice, O you who cleansed us from the stain
of pagan worship;
rejoice, O you who saved us from the mire of evil deeds!
Rejoice, O you who made cease the cult of fire;
rejoice, O you who dispelled the flames of passion!
Rejoice, O you who guide the faithful toward wisdom;
rejoice, O Delight of all the nations!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

408

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Kontakion Six:
The Magi, having become God-bearing heralds, returned
to Babylon, conforming to Your command, announcing You,
the Christ, to all, and leaving Herod as a fool who did not
know how to sing: Alleluia!

Ikos Six:
Illuminating Egypt with the light of truth, You cast away
the darkness of error. For the idols, unable to stand Your might,
fell down, and those who had been delivered from them cried
out to the Theotokos:
Rejoice, O Restoration of mankind;
rejoice, O Downfall of the demons!
Rejoice, O you who crushed the error of deceit;
rejoice, O you who exposed the fraud of idols!
Rejoice, O Sea who drowned the symbolic pharaoh;
rejoice, O Rock who quenched those who thirst for life!
Rejoice, O Pillar of fire who guided those in darkness;
rejoice, O Shelter of the world, wider than the clouds!
Rejoice, O Food who took the place of manna;
rejoice, O Servant of holy delight!
Rejoice, O Land of the promised good;
rejoice, O you who flow with milk and honey!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Seven:
As Simeon was about to leave this present deceitful world,
You were entrusted to him as an infant, but You made Yourself
known to him as the Perfect God. Wherefore, he marveled at
Your wisdom beyond words, and cried out: Alleluia!
409

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ikos Seven:
The Creator displayed a new creation to us who had come
from Him: He came forth from a womb that had received no
seed, and He left it intact as it had been, so that at the sight of
this marvel, we would sing to her and cry out:
Rejoice, O Blossom of incorruption;
rejoice, O Crown of self-mastery!
Rejoice, O you who displays the radiance of resurrection;
rejoice, O you who displayed the life of angels!
Rejoice, Tree of glorious fruit on which the faithful feed;
rejoice, Shady Tree where many are sheltered!
Rejoice, O you who carried the Redeemer of the captives;
rejoice, O you who gave birth to the Guide of the lost!
Rejoice, O you who unsettled even the just judge;
rejoice, Forgiveness for many who have stumbled!
Rejoice, O Robe of boldness for those without hope;
rejoice, O Love surpassing all desire!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Eight:
Now that we have seen this strange birth, let us estrange
ourselves from the world and turn our minds to heaven:
indeed, it is for this that the God Most High appeared on earth
as a lowly man, desiring to draw up to heaven those who cry
out to Him: Alleluia!

Ikos Eight:
While fully present amid those below, The Uncircumscribed Word was in no way absent from those above: for
what happened was a divine condescension, and not a moving
410

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

from one place to another; and it was a birth from a Virgin
inspired by God, who heard these words:
Rejoice, O Space of the spaceless God;
rejoice, O Gate of the sublime mystery!
Rejoice, O Message unsure to men without faith;
rejoice, O Glory most certain to those who believe!
Rejoice, O Sacred Chariot of the One above the cherubim;
rejoice, Perfect Dwelling of the One above the seraphim!
Rejoice, O you who reconciled opposites;
rejoice, O you who combined maidenhood and
motherhood!
Rejoice, O you through whom transgression was erased;
rejoice, O you through whom paradise was opened!
Rejoice, O Key to the Kingdom of Christ;
rejoice, O Hope for the ages of bliss!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Nine:
The whole order of the Angels marveled at the great work
of Your becoming Man: for they saw the One Inaccessible
as God become a Man Accessible to All, living with us and
hearing all cry out: Alleluia!

Ikos Nine:
O Theotokos, we see the best of speakers become as mute
as fish in your regard, for they could not explain how you
could give birth while remaining a virgin. As for us, while
marveling at the mystery, we cry out to you with faith:
Rejoice, O Container of God’s Wisdom;
rejoice, O Treasury of His Providence!
411

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Rejoice, O Reproof of foolish philosophers;
rejoice, O Confusion of speechless wise men!
Rejoice, for you perplexed the inquisitive minds;
rejoice, for you dried up the inventors of myths!
Rejoice, for you ripped the Athenians’ meshes;
rejoice, for you filled the fishermen’s nets!
Rejoice, O Retriever from the abyss of ignorance;
rejoice, O Lamplight of Knowledge to many!
Rejoice, O Ship for those who seek salvation;
rejoice, O Harbor for the sailors of life!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Ten:
Desiring to save the world, the Creator of All came down
to it of His own will. Being at the same time our Shepherd
and our God, He appeared among us, a man like us. And so
the like called upon the like, and as God He heard: Alleluia!

Ikos Ten:
O Virgin Theotokos, you are the Strength of Virgins
and of all those who have recourse to you. For the Maker of
Heaven and Earth covered you with His shadow, O Pure One,
and came to dwell in your womb, and taught us all to cry out
to you:
Rejoice, O Pillar of Virginity;
rejoice, O Gateway of salvation!
Rejoice, O Principle of spiritual recreation;
rejoice, O Dispenser of God’s bounties!
Rejoice, for you restored those born in shame;
rejoice, for you gave wisdom to the mindless!
Rejoice, O you who stopped the corruptor of minds;
412

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

rejoice, O you who bore the Sower of Chastity!
Rejoice, Holy Chamber of virginal wedlock;
rejoice, O you who join the faithful with God!
Rejoice, O gracious foster-mother of virgins;
rejoice, O Bridesmaid of holy souls!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Eleven:
Every hymn falls short when it attempts to sing the
multitude of Your mercies: we could sing to You as many
songs as there are grains of sand, O Holy King, without ever
doing anything worthy of what You have given to those who
cry out to You: Alleluia!

Ikos Eleven:
We see the holy Virgin as a brilliant luminary enlightening
those who live in darkness; for having kindled the Immaterial
Light, she leads men to the knowledge of God and fills their
minds with radiance, so that she is worthily praised in these
words:
Rejoice, O Beam of the mystical sun;
rejoice, O Radiance of the Light without setting!
Rejoice, Lightening-flash that brightens the souls;
rejoice, Thunder-clap that strikes down the foes!
Rejoice, for you have raised the many-lighted Star;
rejoice, for you have opened the many-coursed Stream!
Rejoice, O you who traced the living model of the pool;
rejoice, O you who erased the stain of sin!
Rejoice, Flowing Water that cleanses the conscience;
rejoice, Holy Vessel overflowing with joy!
Rejoice, O Fragrance of the sweetness of Christ;
rejoice, O Life of the mystical banquet!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!
413

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion Twelve:
Because He wished to grant release from all the ancient
debts, the One Who pays men’s dues came down Himself to
those who had spurned His grace; He tore up their obligations,
and heard from all of them this cry: Alleluia!

Ikos Twelve:
By singing to your maternity, we all exalt you as a Spiritual
Temple, O Theotokos! For the One Who dwelt within your
womb, the Lord Who holds all things in His hands, sanctified
you, glorified you and taught all men to sing to you:
Rejoice, O Tabernacle of God the Word;
rejoice, Holy One, superior Holy of Holies!
Rejoice, O Ark that the Spirit has gilded;
rejoice, Inexhaustible Treasure of Life!
Rejoice, Precious Crown of rightful authorities;
rejoice, Sacred Glory of reverent priests!
Rejoice, Unshakable Tower of the Church;
rejoice, Unbreachable Wall of the Kingdom!
Rejoice, O you through whom the trophies are raised;
rejoice, O you through whom the enemies are routed!
Rejoice, O Healing of my body;
rejoice, O Salvation of my soul!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

Kontakion Thirteen
O Mother worthy of all praise, you who have given birth to
the Word, the Holiest of the Holy, accept this present offering,
deliver all men from every affliction, and save from the future
punishment those who cry out to you: Alleluia!
This Kontakion is said three times.
414

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

And the First Ikos is read again:
An Archangel was sent from heaven to greet the
Theotokos, and as he saw You assuming a body at the sound
of his bodiless voice, O Lord, he stood rapt in amazement and
cried to her in these words:
Rejoice, O you through whom joy will shine forth;
rejoice, O you through whom the curse will disappear!
Rejoice, O Restoration of the fallen Adam;
rejoice, O Redemption of the tears of Eve!
Rejoice, O Height beyond the reach of human thought;
rejoice, O Depth, impenetrable even for angelic eyes!
Rejoice, O you who have become a kingly throne;
rejoice, O you who carry Him Who carries all!
Rejoice, O Star who manifest the sun;
rejoice, O Womb of the Divine Incarnation!
Rejoice, O you through whom creation is renewed;
rejoice, O you through whom the Creator is adored!
Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever-pure!

And again the First Kontakion:
To you, our defender and leader in battle, O Theotokos,
we your servants, delivered from our sufferings, offer hymns
of victory and thanksgiving. But you, invincible in power, set
us free from every peril, that we may cry to you: “Rejoice, O
Bride and Maiden ever-pure!”

Ode 7.
Irmos. The three youths courageously walked about in
the flaming furnace, preferring to worship the Creator rather
than created things, and they sang out in joy: Blessed are You
and praised above all, O God of our fathers.
415

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

We sing of your praises and cry out to you: Rejoice, chariot
of the spiritual Sun; you are truly the vine who produced the
sweet grape Whose wine brings joy to the faithful who glorify
you.
You have given birth to the One Who heals all wounds;
rejoice, divine bride, mystical branch which blossomed with
immortality; rejoice, O Queen who fill us with joy and make
us inheritors of life.
The tongue of orators is perplexed when it seeks to praise
you, O Theotokos; you are exalted more than the seraphim in
giving birth to Christ our King; intercede with Him to save
from all danger the faithful who venerate you.
Glory:
The ends of the earth proclaim you blessed, and they
sing with love: Rejoice, holy book in which the hand of the
Father has inscribed His Word; we ask you to beseech Him to
inscribe your servants in the Book of Life, O Theotokos!
Now and ever:
We, your servants, beseech you and we bow our hearts
before you: incline your ear, O Purest One, and save us from
the abyss of temptations; protect your people from the darts of
the Enemy, O holy Theotokos.

Ode 8.
Irmos. The three Youths in the furnace were saved by the
Offspring of the Theotokos. He Who was foretold has been
born on earth, and He joins together all creation to sing to
416

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

you: All you works of the Lord, bless the Lord and praise Him
above all forever!
You have received the Word into your womb; you have
borne the One Who bears the world in His hand; with your
milk, you nourished the One Who nourishes the whole world.
Therefore, we sing to Him: All you works of the Lord, bless
the Lord and praise Him above all forever!
Moses recognized the burning bush in the great mystery
of your childbearing; the Youths clearly prefigured it when
they stood in the midst of the flames without being consumed;
O holy and most pure Virgin, we bless you above all forever!
Once stripped through the deceit of the Serpent,
through your childbearing we have regained the garment of
immortality; we who once sat in the darkness of sin, now
have seen the Light dwelling in your womb; O Virgin and
tabernacle of light, we praise you above all forever!
Glory:
Through you the dead regain life, for you have conceived
the personification of Life; those who are mute begin to speak,
those with leprosy are purified, sickness is driven back, and
the multitude of evil spirits is overcome, through you, O
Virgin, the salvation of mortals.
Now and ever:
You, who gave birth to the Salvation of the world, the
One through which we ascended from the earth to the height,
rejoice, All-Blessed One, the cover and fortress, wall and
stronghold, O Pure, for those who sing: All you works of the
Lord, bless the Lord and praise Him above all forever!
417

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ode 9.
Irmos. May every child of the earth exult in spirit and
hold aloft the burning lamp; may the angels in heaven praise
with joy the holy feast of the Mother of God and sing to her:
Rejoice, O blessed and Ever-Virgin, holy Theotokos.
Deliver us from the unending trials, from the chains of
the Enemy and every other scourge that justly threatens us
because of our sins that we may sing to you: Rejoice; for we
are the faithful who have become participants in your joy.
You are our confidence and our light; therefore, we cry
out to you: Rejoice, unsetting star, who have brought our Sun
into the world; rejoice, pure Virgin, for you open Eden which
had formerly been closed to us; vessel of myrrh who have
received the inexhaustible ointment poured out upon you.
Let us stand with fear in the house of God and say:
Rejoice, Queen of the universe; rejoice, Mary, Lady of our
hearts; rejoice, O all-fair and all-pure one, rejoice, pillar of
fire, leading mortals to their heavenly homeland.
Glory:
Rejoice, Ever-Virgin dove, who gave birth to the God of
goodness; rejoice, glory of all the saints and crown of martyrs,
the adornment of the just and the salvation of all our souls.
Now and ever:
Spare your inheritance, O Lord, closing your eyes to all
our sins; favorably accept the intercession of the one who
bore You on earth, O Christ, when, in Your sovereign love,
You deigned to clothe yourself in human nature.
418

Akathist Hymn to the Most Holy Theotokos

Hymn of Light.
According to: O Women, hear:
(Ženy uslyšite:  

)

Dance for joy; sing for gladness; Gabriel appeared to the
Virgin. He brought joy, the joy of the annunciation to the city
of Nazareth. Rejoice, pure and immaculate intercessors for
the world. Rejoice, heavenly throne.
At the Stichera at the Praises, Tone 4:
According to: As valiant among the martyrs:
(Jako dobl’a:  
)
The great mystery, which even the angels do not know, is
entrusted to the archangel Gabriel; and now he comes to you,
O most pure and fair dove, and he cries out with the One Who
renews the human race: Rejoice, all-holy Lady, through my
word, prepare to receive the Word of God into your womb.
A bright palace is prepared for You, O Lord; it is the womb
of the most pure Virgin. You come to dwell there in Your love
for us, to draw us up from the slavery to death, and to restore
our former beauty; we are waiting for Your Salvation!
The archangel comes to you visibly, O most pure Virgin,
and he says: Rejoice, for you redeem the ancient curse; rejoice,
restoration of fallen humanity; rejoice, chosen one, who alone
are acceptable to the Lord; rejoice, mystical throne of the Sun;
accept the Infinite One Who comes to dwell in your womb.

419

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Tone 4:
The Theotokos heard a strange language when the
Archangel spoke the words of good news; she received
the greeting in faith, and thus conceived the Eternal God.
Therefore, we also cry out in joy: O God Who are incarnate
without change, grant peace to the world and great mercy to
our souls.

Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos
Most gracious Lady, now receive from us, your unworthy
servants, these worthy gifts of praise fitting to you alone,
who are more honorable than any human being and more
beautiful that all of creation seen or unseen. Blessed is the
root of Jesse, and thrice-blessed the house of David from
which you blossomed forth. God is with you and you will not
be shaken. The Most High sanctified you, His tabernacle, and
in you the covenants and vows of God to our fathers received
a glorious fulfillment, for through you the Lord of powers
came to be with us. Blessed are you for all generations, O
holy and blessed one, more exalted than all creatures both in
heaven and on earth, more splendid than the cherubim, and
more glorious than the seraphim, the boast of virgins and
stronghold of the faithful. Most praiseworthy Theotokos, do
not cease praying for us, your unworthy servants, that we may
be delivered from the evil one and from all misfortune. O
Lady, through you we have come to know the Son of God, and
have been deemed worthy of His all-holy Body and Blood. By
your supplications, keep us free from condemnation until the
end, that we all may be saved in all things, as we magnify you
with love. We give glory to your Son, together with the Father
and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.
420

Service to
Archangels and Angels
On Sunday at Vespers, at O Lord, I have cried.

Stichera, Tone 1:
According to: O Martyrs worthy of all praise:
(Prechval’niji Mučenicy:  

)

O bodiless angels, you stand before God’s throne, and you
shine in gleaming splendor. You glow with radiance forever in
the company of the other lights. Pray to Christ to give our
souls peace and great mercy.
O immortal angels, you received true enduring life from
the first moment of your existence. You are truly gifted. You
hold the treasure of gazing on the Eternal Glory and the Eternal
Wisdom. You augment that radiance, and you embellish it
with lights of honor.
O angels and archangels, principalities, thrones,
dominions, six-winged seraphim, and many-eyed cherubim,
O virtues, powers, wisdoms, and godly authorities: pray to
Christ to give our souls peace and great mercy.
421

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Since you are the pure dwelling-place of God, pray with
the angels that I may complete the road of life in virtue, so
that the evening of death may not approach me unprepared,
nor send me into the blazing fire to be tormented. Deliver me
from all of this, O Immaculate One.
At the Aposticha, Tone 7:
According to: No longer forbidden:
(Ne ktomu vozbranjajemi:

)

Illumined with the radiance of the Trinity, O archangels,
enlighten those who sing to you with faith.
Verse: You make your angels spirits and your ministers a
flaming fire. [Psalm 103:4]
As the secondary lights, You show the Perfect Light; pray
that we partake of the First Light.
Verse: Praise Him all his angels. Praise Him all his hosts.
[Psalm 148:3]
Protect the faithful from evil spirits under the shelter of
your wings, for you dispel the darkness.
Glory:
O my guardian angel: you are the secondary light after
God. Do not stop pleading for me. Gaze on the splendor of the
thrice-radiant Godhead for me.
Now and ever:
422

Service to Archangels and Angels

Queen of angels and humans, O Theotokos, do not cease
pleading with your Son on behalf of me, your servant, O
Virgin.
_________________________________________________
If a Moleben, then:
Lord, have mercy. Twelve. Glory: now and ever: Come,
let us worship: Three times. Psalm 142: Lord, listen to my
prayer: Glory: now and ever: Alleluia, three.
_________________________________________________
At Matins, then: The Lord is God,
and the Troparion, Tone 4:
Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us by your prayers and to
shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: Deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Most holy Lady, Mother of Christ our God, you, who
mystically gave birth to the Creator of all, always pray for His
mercy, with the archangels and my guardian angel, to save
my soul from the pains of the original sin and to grant me
forgiveness of sins.
Lord, have mercy. Three times. Then, Psalm 50:
Have mercy on me, God:

423

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

The Canon of the Archangels
Which has this foundation verse:
Let us, O divinely-wise, praise the synaxis of the Bodiless
Ones.

A Composition of Joseph
Tone 8. Ode 1.
Irmos. Let us sing to our wonderful God Who freed Israel
from slavery, O people. We sing a song of triumph. We chant:
Master, we sing to You alone!
Versicle: Holy archangels and angels, pray to God for us!
Come, people! Let us sing to the uncreated Trinity Who
governs the ranks of His ministers in heaven. Let us sing:
Holy, Holy, Holy are You, God almighty.
You have formed a choir from the first fruits of Your
creation, spiritual beings which surround your throne, singing
to You: Holy, Holy, Holy are You, God almighty.
Rejoice, Gabriel, herald of the incarnation. Rejoice,
Michael, prince of angels. You join in the song: Holy, Holy.
Holy are You, God almighty.
Theotokion:
I am moved by the mystery of your incarnation, O Christ.
You were God by nature. You willed to be born a man through
the virgin, that You might save the world from the devil’s
grasp.
424

Service to Archangels and Angels

Ode 3.

Irmos. Instill reverence in the hearts of Your servants,
Lord. Give strength to us who truly invoke You.
You have established those mighty beings who do your
will by your power, Immortal One. They are with You always
in the highest.
Receive the ministers of Your Incarnation and Your true
Resurrection, O Christ, these leaders of the angelic hosts who
pray for us.
You have appointed angels to guard humans,
Compassionate Lord. You have made them ministers of Your
salvation, for Your saints, O Christ.
Theotokion.
O Bride of God: in a very mysterious manner you
conceived the Lord and Savior. He rescues those who invoke
you from any awful fate.

Sessional Hymn. Tone 8:
According to: Command:
(Povel’innoje:  
)
Prince of heavenly hosts! Leader of those who wait at the
sublime throne of Divinity’s glory on high: O Archangel Michael,
in the company of all holy angels, seek absolution from the
Lord for the whole world by your unceasing prayers. Seek the
remission of sins, mercy and grace for us on judgment day.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion.
Through my many evil deeds of lawlessness I have fallen
into a pit of despair. I am confused. I am filled with anxiety. O
Lady Theotokos, save me! Help me! You are purification for
sinners. You are the regeneration of the fallen.
425

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Stavrotheotokion.
You saw him hanging on the tree, surrounded by evil
men. He became man from you, virgin Lady, and took flesh
from your flesh. Your heart pained and you shed a mother’s
tears: O! O! O, my Child! How strange and mysterious is that
divine plan by which You regenerated creation. I sing of Your
compassion for humanity.

Ode 4.
Irmos. Like a rider on horses, Lord, You have been
carried by Your apostles. You have guided them like horses
with reins. Your sojourn has worked salvation for all who
believe and sing: Glory to Your power, O Lord!
Like a rider on horses, Lover of Mankind, You have sat
upon the throne of angels. You have guided them like horses
with reins. Your sojourn has worked salvation for all who
faithfully sing: Glory to Your power, O Lord!
O Immortal One, You filled the angels with Your virtues,
and the ends of the earth are full of Your divine and glorious
praise, O One Who had no beginning. With the angels we sing
to You: Glory to Your power, O Lord!
You came to save Your people, O compassionate Lord.
You summoned Your ministers to this work, O Christ. Your
advent is joy for those who believe and sing to You: Glory to
Your power, O Lord!
Theotokion.
You have appeared as a mother and a virgin, most pure
one, for you gave birth to Christ, Who is both God and man,
426

Service to Archangels and Angels

Who the angels praise for through your prayers you have
changed your people’s sorrow to joy.

Ode 5.
Irmos. You brought the whole world out of the darkness
of ignorance, O Lord, by imparting the knowledge of God.
Enlighten me with the dawn of Your love for mankind.
The angelic hosts praise You, O Christ, because You are
the summit of every desire, and they are carried to the very
heights by this desire.
You have formed Your angels in your own image, O
Christ. You have made them a chorus for Your majesty. They
are intellectual by nature and incorruptible in Your grace, O
Incomprehensible One.
By keeping them close to You, O Lord, You have preserved
Your ministers from evil passions. You do good to those who
serve You, for You are the very source of goodness.
Theotokion.
O all-immaculate Lady, revive my soul deadened by
passions. Guide me to the path of eternal and blessed life, for
you gave birth to the Sustainer of life.

Ode 6.
Irmos. You rescued Jonah in the whale. Rescue me from
the turbulence as You rescued him. Save me who am fettered
with the devil’s wiles.
Out of nothing You created the immortal armies of heaven
by the word of Your command. You made them radiant.
427

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You have become the ministers of God’s praise, angelic
spirits. You cover your Creator with glory. You are His divine
tabernacle. You are citizens of heaven.
Theotokion.
You are praiseworthy who gave birth to the Light that
shines on all. O Pure One, banish the darkness of my sins
through Your motherly prayers to Him
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.

Ikos:
O Lover of Mankind, O Immortal One, You said in Your
scriptures that the multitude of angels in heaven would rejoice
at the repentance of one person. Therefore, we sinners always
dare to implore Your compassion, O only-sinless One Who
sees our hearts. Be generous to us and send down Your mercy
upon us unworthy ones. O Master, grant forgiveness to us, for
the leaders of the bodiless powers are praying to You for all
of us.

Ode 7.
Irmos. The Hebrew youths trampled bravely upon the
flames in the furnace, and they changed the fire into dew,
singing: Blessed are You, O Lord God, forever!

428

Service to Archangels and Angels

You have revealed, O Compassionate One, the immaterial
essence of Your angels to be lights filled with ineffable light,
and they cry out to You unceasingly: Blessed are You, O Lord
God, forever!
The multitudes of angels stand ministering without ceasing
before Him but dare not gaze upon the divine countenance as
they cry out: Blessed are You, O Lord God, forever!
Through the Hypostatic Word You created the ranks of the
angels, O God. You sanctified them by the Divine Spirit. You
have taught them to bless the Trinity, forever!
Trinitarian Hymn.
Meditating on the three Hypostases, we praise the
uncircumscribed essence of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
as we sing: Blessed are You, O Lord God of our fathers!

Ode 8.
Irmos. To the Lord Who was glorified on the holy
mountain, to the Lord Who revealed the virgin birth to Moses
in a burning bush, sing praise and glory forever.
Let us imitate the life of the angels and lift our minds to
the heights, and let us join spiritually with them, and praise
the Lord and exalt Him, forever!
The angels of the heavenly choir, exceedingly joyful, who
stand before the throne of glory, beholding God at all times,
sing and glorify Him, forever!

429

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You have made into a flame of immaterial fire those who
ceaselessly sing Your praises in the highest; You have made
spirits Your angel messengers. Let us prostrate before the
Trinity and glorify, forever!
Theotokion.
You Who dwelt in the womb of a virgin, and through her,
in a mysterious way, raising up the old Adam: to You, the
Lord, we sing praise and glorify, forever!

Ode 9.
Irmos. You have gone above nature in conceiving the
Creator and Lord. You became a door of salvation for the
world. We praise you forever for this, O Theotokos.
We extol You ceaselessly, O Christ, Who have ineffably
united the things of earth and heaven, and have fashioned one
Church of angels and humans.
Angels and archangels, and thrones, and dominions,
and principalities, virtues, and powers, and cherubim and
seraphim, pray with the Theotokos for the world.
Trinitarian Hymn.
We glorify You, O Trinity, for You have created all things
from non-existence, and have adored the orders of angels and
You shine these Godly stars to the ends of the world.
Theotokion.
Rejoice, holy Bride of God! Rejoice, you who gave birth
to the Light of the faithful. Rejoice, wall and protection of us
all. Pray without ceasing to God our Benefactor for us.
430

Service to Archangels and Angels

The Stichera to the Guardian Angels [at the Praises,]
Tone 2:
According to: O house of Ephrata:
)
(Dome Evfratov:
O angel of God who stand with boldness before the Holy
Trinity, do not cease praying for me, your servant.
Because God has given you the might to guard my soul,
keep it always under the shelter of your wings.
I thank Jesus, Who gave you to me, the great guardian of
my soul, and the weapon against my enemies, the pious angel.
Make me worthy of the kingdom of God Most High, that
I might join you there and sing the thrice-holy hymn.
Glory:
O my guardian angel: you are the secondary light after
God. Do not stop pleading for me. Gaze on the splendor of the
thrice-radiant Godhead for me.
Now and ever:
Queen of angels and humans, O Theotokos, do not cease
pleading with your Son on behalf of me, your servant, O
Virgin.

Prayer to the Holy Angels
To you, as protectors and guardians of my life, I, a pitiful
being, prostrate to pray: grant me through your prayers to go
through the daily sojourn pleasing to God and inexperienced
431

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

in wicked deeds and thoughts. Open my ears to hear that I
may listen and comprehend the deeds and words of God that
are beneficial for the soul; that I may see with the spiritual
eyes, for I am possessed by sinful darkness. Pray for me,
since I have sinned at all times, that I might not be struck
by the sword of the Lord’s fury: “my offenses tower higher
than my head, and they are like a heavy burden weighing on
me” [Psalm 38]. Yet, You, my Lord, Lord, “turn to me and
have mercy on me” [Psalm 118], and “bring my soul forth
from the prison” of sins [Psalm 141], before I depart from
here and come before Your fearsome judgment. Accept Your
holy angels who pray for me, who stand around Your altar
with fear, and through their prayers and especially through
the prayers of Your most pure Mother, deliver me from Your
fearsome, terrible judgment. For You are the Lamb of God
Who take away the sins of the whole world, crucified on
the cross for our salvation; listen to my prayer and send the
guardian angel to my soul and body, that, being led by him,
I may be delivered from every visible and invisible enemy
and may receive Your mercy with all those who pleased You
since time began. For You are our God, and I come to You and
I hope in You, although I have sinned more than any human
being, I do not depart from You, nor lift up my hand to another
god. I pray You, O Lord Jesus Christ, and bless and worship
You, for You are one in the Trinity, with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and forever. Amen.

432

Service to
Saint John the Forerunner
On Monday evening at Vespers, at O Lord, I have cried:

Stichera, Tone 1:
According to: O martyrs worthy of all praise:
(Prechval’niji Mučenicy:  

)

Wondrous prophet, baptizer of Christ, and Forerunner, I
pray that you deign to draw rivers of flowing tears from my
dried and wasted heart by your prayers so that being saved
through the many pains you have suffered, I may extol you
who are so exalted.
I put my hope in you, blessed prophet, and my life’s
desires. You baptized Christ Jesus, and He saves the world
from sin’s depths. O John, beg Him to wash my heart clean. I
pray to you to beg Christ to save me.
You are a preacher of vision: you spoke of world-wide
penance. O godly Forerunner, grant that my blind and grieving
soul may take up the call of penance. Grant that my soul may
do the will of the Lord always, and for this I will praise you
with love and fidelity.
433

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Along with that great Forerunner who heralded the Lamb
of absolution, beg Christ to save me from the fate of the goats
at judgment’s hour, O Virgin. May He number me with the
sheep at His right hand, even though I do not deserve it.

At the Aposticha, Tone 2:
According to: When from the wood of the cross:
)
(Jehda ot dreva:
Angel and Apostle, martyr, prophet, Forerunner and giver
of light! O herald of Christ, you who baptized Him, friend
and seal of prophets! O greatest of those born of women!
Link of old and new graces! Voice of knowledge in the world!
Conduct our works of prayer straight to the Compassionate
God by your holy intercession.
Verse: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has
visited and brought redemption to his people. [Luke 1:68]
Blessed Forerunner, as you saw the Christ walk on earth,
you proclaimed: Behold the Lamb of God Who takes away the
sins of the world! Beg Him to forgive the sins of those who
venerate you. You have great influence with Him, O Baptist,
for you are the link between the law and grace.
Verse: And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most
High. [Luke 1:76]
Come quickly! Deliver me from temptation, I beg you O
glorious prophet of the Lord. They have striven against me in
vain. Those who besiege me are worse than devils. They try
to capture your servant’s miserable soul like some bird. Be
constantly with me, that they may see you are my protection.
434

Service to Saint John the Forerunner

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
By a common ancestry and by your common prayers you
are like one person, O Mother of the Supreme King, O godly
Forerunner! Make intercession together for the servant who
has so angered the gracious merciful Lord. Disposed by your
intercession, may He be generous, save me, and deliver me
from the damned!
_________________________________________________
If a Moleben, then:
Lord, have mercy. Twelve. Glory: now and ever: Come,
let us worship: Three times. Psalm 142: Lord, listen to my
prayer: Glory: now and ever: Alleluia, three.
_________________________________________________
At Matins, then:
The Lord is God, and has revealed Himself to us:
After this, the Troparion, Tone 2:
The memory of the righteous is celebrated with praise,
but for you, O Forerunner, the Lord’s testimony is enough.
You were shown to be more honorable than the prophets since
you were deemed worthy to baptize in the waters the Lord you
had proclaimed. Therefore, you fought for the truth, and with
joy proclaimed the good news to those in Hades, that God has
appeared in the flesh to take away the sins of the world and to
grant us great mercy.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Through you, O Ever-Virgin Theotokos, we share in the
divine nature. It is only right, then, that we should revere you
and praise you, for you gave birth to God Who took flesh for
us.
435

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Psalm 50: Have mercy on me, God:

CANON.
Tone 8. Ode 1.
Irmos. Let us sing to Christ Who wiped out Pharaoh’s
tyranny in the sea. He set Israel on dry land, and He shall be
praised forever!
Verse: Holy and great John, Forerunner of the Lord, pray
to God for us.
O Forerunner, O preacher of penance, pray to the Lord
and Savior that I may undertake penance with all my heart.
I lovingly venerate you, for you give light to my heart and
mind.
As the most beautiful sheep of the desert, martyr for Christ
and Forerunner, now guide me from this desert of passion to a
life of penance by your holy power.
Glory:
I beg you, wise Forerunner, to free me from the torture
of sin by your intercession. Destroy the diabolic whirlwind
raging within me.
Now and ever:
Mother of truth, save me! I am cruelly troubled by passion,
and I often succumb. Guide me to the calm haven of salvation,
pure Lady.

436

Service to Saint John the Forerunner

Ode 3.
Irmos. You made heaven firm by Your word. Strengthen
our minds and hearts that we may praise You for our souls’
salvation.
You baptized the very depth of all compassion in the river,
the Lord Himself. O Forerunner and praiseworthy martyr, rain
down penance upon me.
With the stormy waves of life beating against my mind, I
run to your shelter, O Forerunner of the Savior. Come quickly;
save me your servant!
Glory:
I invoke You at my night prayers, O daylight of the
world, O blessed of God. O Forerunner, enlighten my better
sentiments.
Now and ever:
Rejoice, we greet you, holy Theotokos. Rejoice to you
who gave birth to the Joy of the world! Rejoice, hand which
distributes heavenly manna to all the faithful.
Sessional Hymn, Tone 7:
O Lord, wash the defilement of my soul through the
hyssop of Your mercy, O Savior, and cleanse it from passions;
have mercy on me, O Master; save Your creature through the
prayers of Your Forerunner, You alone are the most merciful.

437

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Always praiseworthy Theotokos, you are the fervent
intercessor of Christians, and their very defense. Therefore,
with the Forerunner pray to your Son to give us mercy.

Ode 4.
Irmos. O Lord, I have heard of the mystery of Your plan
of salvation and have meditated on all Your works; that is why
I give glory to Your divinity.
I weep for myself, for I have always lived a dissolute life.
O Forerunner, preserve me and save me, for I perish in my sin.
O blessed man, I find that you are a helper with prayer and
intercession. You shall strengthen my soul. You will enlighten
my mind.
Glory:
I am filled with distress. I am drowning in a storm of sin.
Draw me into a harbor of divine understanding, O Forerunner
of Christ.
Now and ever:
I have lived a dissolute life, and you have humbled me, O
most pure Lady. You gave birth to Him Who, after humbling
Himself, has ascended on high.

Ode 5.
Irmos. We have gone from the night of ignorance to the
day of knowing God in the light of Your face, O Christ. May
our song of praise brighten our hearts like the dawn.
438

Service to Saint John the Forerunner

Enlighten me who have strayed into life’s night, glorious
Forerunner. You are the first light of the Sun of Justice.
O, that you might be my protector, O Forerunner, when I
shall have to stand before the Lord at the coming judgment.
I am confident you will rescue me from the suffering of
damnation.
Glory:
Establish me on the rock of divine desires, O praiseworthy
one, for I am tossed about by the devils’ temptations.
Now and ever:
As the greatest of all creatures, O Mother of God, raise
me up above the snares of the enemy, O perfect Virgin.

Ode 6.
Irmos. O most merciful Christ our God, Who clothe
Yourself with light as with a garment, grant me a robe of light.
Clear my whole heart with the axe of true penance, most
wise John. Make it verdant with deeds of virtue.
We bear immense pains. From the very bottom of my
heart I invoke you, Forerunner, to free me from these cruel
pains.
Glory:
Undertake fervent penance, O my soul! Behold, the Judge
is coming! Arise! Call to Him: Jesus, my God, be generous
with me for the sake of Your Forerunner.
439

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
You gave birth to the incarnate Word by a word, uniquely
immaculate Lady. We pray that you will deliver our souls
from the trap of the enemy.

Kontakion, Tone 3:
According to: Today the Virgin:
(D’iva dnes’:  
)
Today she who was once barren gives birth to Christ’s
Forerunner. He himself is the fulfillment of all prophecy; for
in the Jordan, he imposed his hand upon the Word of God
Whom the prophets had foretold and was shown to be His
prophet, herald, and Forerunner.

Ikos:
Let us now praise the Forerunner of the Lord. Elizabeth
gave birth to him from a barren womb, but not without seed. For
Christ alone passed through the impassable gate without seed.
Elizabeth, the barren one, gave birth to John, but not without a
father. The pure Virgin, however, by the overshadowing of the
Father and the Spirit of God, gave birth to Jesus. And John,
who was born from a barren one, manifested himself to be a
prophet, a herald, and also the Forerunner of the One born
without seed.

Ode 7.
Irmos. In the beginning You created the earth with a word
and established the heavens. Blessed are You, O Lord God of
our fathers, forever.
440

Service to Saint John the Forerunner

You prepared the way of the Lord, O Forerunner. Guide
my steps the same way that I may sing: Blessed are You, O
God of our fathers.
Herald of Light, enlighten my soul. Deliver me from evil
darkness and burning Gehenna with a confident spirit, for I
run to you.
Glory:
You are the fruit of a barren woman. Change the barrenness
of my heart into fruitfulness with your prayers, O wise Baptist
of Christ.
Now and ever:
Chosen lamb of the Word of God, pray to God Who took
flesh from you to number me among the sheep He chooses at
the dread hour.

Ode 8.
Irmos. The eternal King of Glory, before Whom the
powers of heaven tremble, sing to Him, O priests; extol Him,
O people, for all ages.
O Baptist, pray the Lamb of God Who takes away the
sins of the world, Who you pointed out to all, to deaden my
passions and save my soul.
Lift the burden of my soul. Conquer those who battle
against me, O Baptist of the Lord. Leave me unscathed from
their evil deeds.

441

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
You went off and became a recluse, O prophet, and you
dwelt in the impassible desert. Therefore, I pray you to grant
that the passions of my soul dry quickly.
Now and ever:
You are the vine, O Virgin, that gave birth to the ripe
grapes. Now you have quenched my thirst with the vintage of
repentance, restoring my soul from the drunkenness of evil.

Ode 9.
Irmos. With unceasing hymns, we extol the birth giving
of the Ever-Virgin, revealed to the lawgiver on the mountain
in the burning bush. For us, the faithful, she is our salvation.
I have been found guilty in my deeds, O Word. Woe is
me! I want to stand upright before Your awesome throne, but
what can I say? Pardon me then, Lord my God, for the sake of
the one who baptized You.
As the voice of the Word, lift my voice to God, most wise
Baptist, and deliver me from the malice of the devils and the
temptations of humans; then I will bless you as I ought.
Glory:
Quench my thirst with the immortal drink of Christ’s
commandments. Slake my thirst with living water, O
Forerunner and Baptist, and grant redemption through God,
for I run to your protection.
Now and ever:
442

Service to Saint John the Forerunner

Most glorious Lady and pure Virgin, with the Forerunner,
pray your Son and King to save from all necessities those who
bless you faithfully.

Prayer to Saint John the Forerunner
O Baptizer of Christ, preacher of penitence, do not disdain
me who repents, but as you are united with the heavenly
armies, pray to our Master for me: unworthy, sorrowful,
weak, and sad, for I have fallen into many distresses. I am
an abyss of wicked deeds, for I am burdened by powerful
thoughts in my mind; I am the source of sinful deeds which are
almost endless. My poor thoughts are nailed to earthly things.
What am I to do?   I do not know to whom to flee that my
soul may be saved; only to you, O holy John, whose name is
gracious, for I know that, before the Lord, after the Theotokos,
you are greater than any other one born of woman. You were
granted to touch the head of Christ the King, the Lamb of
God Who takes away the sins of the world. Pray to Him for
my sinful soul, so that at least from now, in the eleventh
hour, I may bring a measure of grace and receive the reward
with the ones who came last to labor in the vineyard. Yes, O
Baptizer of Christ, honorable Forerunner, the last prophet, the
first martyr in grace, leader to all who fast and those who are
desert-dwellers, teacher of purity and close friend of Christ, I
run to you, do not dismiss me from your protection, but raise
me up who am falling because of the multitude of sins, renew
my soul with penitence by the Sacrament of Penance which
is like another baptism, since you are the leader preaching
repentance. Baptism washes the Ancestral Sin, and by means
of repentance all are cleansed of the evil deed. Purify me who
am covered by sins to enter where nothing wicked can enter,
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen.
443

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

It is truly proper: Trisagion. After Our Father: Troparion.
The memory of the righteous: and the Theotokion.
And the Dismissal:
May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save
us through the prayers of His most pure Mother, and of the
honorable and glorious prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist John;
of our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints,
for Christ is good and loves mankind.

444

Canon
to the Most Holy Theotokos Hodegetria
A Composition of the Hieromonk Ignatius.
Tone 4. Ode 1.
Irmos. I will open my mouth. It will be filled by the
Spirit, and I will offer words of praise to the Queen Mother. I
will celebrate solemnly in radiance. In rejoicing, I will sing of
these wonders.
In my rejoicing, I now offer you praise, pure Lady, with
joy. I sing to you with tranquil voice, O Hodegetria—rejoice!
Fill me, who sing to you, with understanding.
Birth-giver of Christ, our eternal joy, O rejoice, all-praised
hope of the orthodox. O Virgin Hodegetria, fill me with that
joy which the world desires.
Glory:
All people sing with joy, and angels always cry out
together in heaven and on earth, O Hodegetria: Rejoice, O
Virgin! Your birth-giving has filled everyone with joy.
Now and ever:
O Joy, Hodegetria, grant joy to those who sing to you with
fear and awe. You are the Mother of that Joy which delivers us
445

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

from all sorrow and who have mercy on all those who hasten
to you.

Ode 3.

Irmos. O Theotokos, O living and overflowing fountain,
strengthen those who assembled in a spiritual choir to sing
hymns of praise to you, and, in the feast of your conception of
the Divine One, grant to them the crowns of glory.
O Rejoice, unshakeable, immaculate, and inspired Palace
for Christ, the King in the highest. Rejoice, Hodegetria.
Rejoice, to you through whom our city has been preserved
intact.
O Virgin Hodegetria, you contained in your immaculate
womb Him Whom creation cannot contain. Therefore,
rendering what we owe to you, we sing: Rejoice, we extol you!
Glory:
O joy of the world whom the multitudes praise! Pure
Lady, ever do we sing to you with joy. We have been deemed
worthy of lasting joy by the maternal prayers you offer the
One to Whom you gave birth, O Hodegetria.
Now and ever:
We petition you, O pure one: the golden container,
the candelabrum, the staff, and the altar, O Hodegetria.
Pronouncing these titles and with the invocation: Rejoice, we
ever call upon you.

Sessional Hymn, Tone 2:
A warm prayer-house and an insurmountable wall, a
source of mercy, a refuge for the world, we sincerely call to
You: Our Lady, Theotokos, hasten and save us from disaster,
the only imminent intercessor.
446

Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos Hodegetria

Ode 4.
Irmos. He Who sits in glory on the throne of the Godhead,
Jesus the true God, has come on a mystical cloud. With His
incorrupt hand He saves those who sing: glory to your power,
O Christ!
Rejoice, wonder of all wonders, O Lady Hodegetria.
Rejoice, O Joy of all, O invincible Christian protection
for endangered cities and towns. Rejoice, O conqueror of
enemies, O strong defense!
Rejoice, rejoice, glory of orthodox kings and true
protection of Christ-loving armies, O Queen of us all. Rejoice,
Hodegetria, O refuge and strength of us all.
Glory:
Rejoice, speedy deliverer of those endangered. Rejoice,
ready comfort of those in sorrow. Rejoice, for you deserve to
be praised in song. Rejoice, all-blessed Hodegetria, for you
are healing for all the sick.
Now and ever:
Rejoice! All creation hastens to extol these marvels
properly. Yet it cannot, O Hodegetria, so it sings to you.
Rejoice, O Lady, dwelling of God.

Ode 5.
Irmos. The universe was in awe at your divine glory, for
you, O Virgin who has not known wedlock have borne in your
womb the God of all and have given birth to an Eternal Son
Who grants salvation to those who praise you.
You are the abyss of grace and bounty. Rejoice, O Virgin
Hodegetria. Rejoice, for you are joy to all the faithful. Rejoice,
O intercessor of all who are in trouble and sorrow.
447

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Some have seen the splendors of your marvels. All of us
at least hearing—if not seeing—them are filled with the most
complete joy, and we sing to you always and everywhere.
Rejoice, O Hodegetria.
Glory:
Rejoice, Hodegetria. Rejoice, dwelling and home of
Christ our God. O inexpressible and heavenly Virgin of His
glory. Rejoice, richly furnished palace. Rejoice, city ever
prosperous and royal.
Now and ever:
We see you as in an ocean, O Virgin Hodegetria, servant
and unmitigated joy. We rejoice and sing of those heavenly
gifts so intangibly received from you. Rejoice, we cry out.

Ode 6.
Irmos. By divine inspiration we celebrate this holy and
God-given feast of the Mother of God. Come, clap your
hands. Let us praise God Whom she bore.
You heard this greeting of “rejoice,” O pure Lady, and
you accepted Christ. You gave him birth in a mysterious way,
O Virgin Hodegetria, so that everyone says “rejoice” to you.
You have fulfilled all joy. You joined those above with
those below, O Hodegetria. Therefore, now heaven and the
whole earth joyfully call to you with a great voice.
Glory:
Rejoice, praiseworthy Lady and Hodegetria. Rejoice,
comfort of widows and orphans. Rejoice to you who have
showered unfailing riches upon them.
448

Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos Hodegetria

Now and ever:
Glimmering with all gold, brighter than the morning
sunlight, O dwelling of Christ, hail to you! Rejoice, Virgin
Hodegetria. Rejoice, Unwedded Bride.

Kontakion, Tone 6:
No other help, no other hope do we possess beside you,
O most pure Virgin. Do you help us now, for we hope in you,
and we glory in you. Since we are your servants; do not let us
be confounded.

Another Kontakion, in the same tone:
Steadfast Protrectress of Christians, unshakable
Mediatrix before the Creator, do not despise the prayerful
voices of sinners; but in your goodness hurry to assist those
who faithfully cry out to you. Hasten to intercede and heed
our supplication, interceding always, Theotokos, in behalf of
those who honor you.

Ikos:
Stretch forth your hands which have received as a child
the Lord of all. Because of the greatness of your goodness,
do not forsake us who always hope in you. Through your allpowerful prayers and unfailing forgiveness, have mercy on us
and grant to our souls your mercy which is inexhaustible; for
we sinners have in you a protectress against every misfortune
and evil. Therefore, as one who has the graces of mercy,
hasten to intercede and hear our supplication, interceding
always, Theotokos, in behalf of those who honor you.
After the gospel, the sticheron, Tone 6:
Do not entrust me to human intercession, most holy
449

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Lady, but receive the prayers of your servant, because sorrow
possesses me, and I am unable to suffer the power of demons;
I have no shelter, nor a place to run, I, the wretched one; I am
embattled from all sides, and I have no protection, except you,
Lady of creation, the hope and intercessor of the faithful, do
not despise my prayer; do that which will profit me.

Ode 7.
Irmos. Wise in God, they served no creature in place of
God. They overcame the flaming menace with confidence.
They rejoiced and sang: blessed are You and praiseworthy, O
Lord and God of our fathers!
Rejoice, rejoice, Theotokos Hodegetria, who always
directs all the faithful along every road that leads to salvation.
Rejoice, Lady, because we are delivered from the imminent
danger of barbarians through you.
Rejoice, rejoice, Hodegetria, you have guarded us and
prayed to God for us. You have delivered your people from all
evil by your intercession; we are delivered from all affliction,
you who gave birth to God.
Glory:
Rejoice, rejoice, most holy Hodegetria. You have granted
our petitions as we desired. You have always sought a direct
and sincere bond of fraternal love among the elect.
Now and ever:
Rejoice, rejoice Hodegetria for seafarers sailing through
violent seas, you have rescued the faithful and deliver all
from every sorrow, and quickly grant respite from delays and
damaged sails.
450

Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos Hodegetria

Ode 8.

Irmos. The Offspring of the maternity of the Theotokos
saved the three young men in the furnace. Then, it was a
mystic type, but now it is fulfilled and it gathers the whole
universe to sing to you: all you works of the Lord, praise and
exalt Him forever.
Rejoice, all-blessed Mary! The all-holy Lord robed
Himself in manhood like mine from your pure flesh. Clothing
Himself in our flesh He joined it to His divinity by an
unfathomable union, O Virgin Hodegetria. Rejoice, Full of
Grace, O Joy of all the world.
Rejoice, banishment of evil spirits. Rejoice, Theotokos,
Hodegetria. Rejoice, because you became the Mother of God,
the invisible armies of heaven always praise and extol you.
Rejoice, for you have united those above with those below.
Glory:
Rejoice, you undoubtedly exceed all heavenly powers.
Rejoice, Hodegetria. Almighty Lady, rejoice, you are the
mistress of all creation, because you gave birth to God.
Rejoice, because you remain a Virgin after the Nativity.
Now and ever:
Rejoice, for you are the glory of all women, you are the
most holy temple of our God. Rejoice, Hodegetria. Rejoice,
for you are salvation for the souls of the whole universe.
Rejoice, for you are an all-covering cloud that is wider than
the heavens. Rejoice, for you are the peacemaker of the Divine
Peace.

451

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ode 9.
Irmos. Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let
the bodiless powers solemnly celebrate in honor of the sacred
feast. O Mother of God, let them cry out: Rejoice, ever-blessed
Theotokos and pure Ever-Virgin.
Rejoice, Lamp which radiates a never-failing light. You
destroyed the gloom of polytheism by your birthgiving.
You have delivered the people from the pit of hell. Rejoice,
Theotokos Hodegetria and foremost intercessor for all
blessings.
Rejoice, Earth from which the heavenly grain sprouted
for the faithful. Deliver the world from soul-starving famine,
O understanding and inspired Lady. Rejoice, Vineyard which
grew a life-giving cluster of grapes, O Theotokos, Pure
Hodegetria!
Glory:
Rejoice, most beautiful of all mystical flowers of paradise!
Rejoice, Virgin Mother, Meditation of spirits. You triumphed
in your purity, Birth-Giver of God. Rejoice, Maiden and
Hodegetria, wonder and attraction of the whole world.
Now and ever:
We are now in the summer of our life. Protect our life,
Virgin Maiden, by your help. Grant us to reach a good end,
for we sing to you and invoke you: Rejoice, all-blessed
Theotokos, pure Lady and Hodegetria.

452

Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos Hodegetria

After this,

The Prayer to the Most Holy Lady Theotokos:
O Theotokos my most holy Lady, I your worthless servant,
I beg you: by your holy and all-powerful prayers rid my heart of
all despair, of all sluggishness and slowness in understanding,
of all negligence, of all evil and crafty thoughts. By your mighty
prayers cleanse my clouded mind and bruised heart of all this.
Put out the flames of all my passions. Free me from memories
of evils long gone by. Rescue me from every tendency to do
wrong. Behold my need, my Lady; behold my sorrow! In your
goodness help me, for blessed are you by all peoples, and your
all-honored name is glorified forever. Amen.

453

Service
to the Holy Apostles
On Wednesday evening, at O Lord, I have cried:
Stichera, Tone 4:
According to: As valiant among the martyrs
(Jako dobl’a:  
)
O most praiseworthy disciples, as eyewitnesses and
testifiers of the Incarnate Word, you are blessed, for as brilliant
lightning you appear upon the world. As spiritual mountains
you carve delights for us. As the ever-flowing, parted rivers
of paradise you give to the Church of the Gentiles the divine
waters to drink.
As the rays that are resplendent with the radiance of the
Spirit, you were sent into the whole world. You have worked
an abundance of miracles. You were the ministers of the
mysteries of Christ, and the God-written tablets of the divine
grace inscribed with the God-instructed law, O praiseworthy
priest-servants.
The rod of the fisherman has brought into order the
wanderings of philosophers and the long-windedness of
orators, for having clearly expounded the Gospel in the Godwise teachings, the doctrine of grace, and of the gracious
Mysteries, as well as the communion of the Eternal Food, the
delight of angels and the ever-abiding glory.
454

Service to the Holy Apostles

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion.
Rejoice, O luminous sun; the bearer of the Never-setting
Sun which has shone forth the Incomprehensible Sun.
Rejoice, O mind that sparkles forth the divine lights. Rejoice,
O ray of light that illuminates the ends of the earth and is truly
the golden light, perfectly beautiful and unblemished that has
shone forth the Never-ending Light to the faithful.
At the Aposticha, Tone 6:
According to: Third day resurrection:
(Tridnevno voskresl’:  

)

You are the ministers of the great divine mysteries, O
theologians and disciples who have seen God; and you have
received the grace to heal, and you cure the sicknesses of all
people.
Verse: Through all the earth their voice resounds; their
message reaches to the ends of the world. [Psalm 18:5]
You are a great shelter and protection for our souls. You
banish evil spirits, apostles of the Lord who have seen God.
Therefore, we ever honor you.
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament proclaims his handiwork. [Psalm 18:2]
Deliver those who praise you in faith, from all tribulation,
sin, evil desire, and diabolical harm, O blessed, divine apostles.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
455

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Mother of Christ God: deliver us from adversity. You
gave birth to the Creator of the universe, and so we sing to
you: Rejoice, unique intercession for our souls.
__________________________________________________________________________________________

If it is a Moleben:
Lord, have mercy, Twelve. Glory: now and ever: Come,
let us worship: three. Psalm 142: Lord, listen to my prayer:
Glory: now and ever: Alleluia, three.

__________________________________________________________________________________________

At Matins, then:
The Lord is God: and the Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles, intercede with the merciful God that he
may grant our souls forgiveness of sins.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
We have come to recognize Christ our God, the Word of
the Father, was incarnate of you, O Virgin Theotokos, the only
pure, only blessed one. Therefore, we extol you unceasingly
in hymns.
After this, Psalm 50:
Have mercy on me, God:

CANON TO THE HOLY APOSTLES
A Composition of Kyr Theophane.
Tone 4. Ode 1.
Irmos. With dry feet Israel marched across the dark abyss
of the sea. Moses’ hands, uplifted like a cross, crushed the
power of Amalech in the desert.
456

Service to the Holy Apostles

Versicle: Holy apostles, pray to God for us.
O heavenly trumpeters of the Comforter, You always
proclaim Him with a divine trumpet. Sing a hymn for us, for
it will bring salvation, O blessed apostles of Christ.
I am lying on a bed of laziness, and in my sinful death I
have fallen ill with a terrible, sinful disease. Make me worthy
by your visitations, O glorious eyewitnesses of Christ.
Glory:
With the Word you filled the dumb tongues with speech,
O apostles. Enlighten my heart with the goodness of the
Comforter, for it is chained by dumb deeds.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
After bearing a child you were still a perfect virgin. You
bore the Word Who came to earth especially for us. Pray to
Him worthily to enlighten our souls!

Ode 3.
Irmos: The Church rejoices in You, Christ, and sings:
You are my strenghth, O Lord, my shelter, and my assurance.
O God, through the streams of Your verbal rivers—Your
disciples, O Master, give sacred joy to Your city.
In the company of the leaders of the spiritual armies,
deliver us from all sorrow, O truly glorious apostles and
citizens of heaven.
Glory:
Having established the heavens as witnesses, Christ,
457

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

establish me on the foundation of Your will by their prayers.
You are truly compassionate!
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Your mother prays to You together with the choir of the
disciples, O Lord, for she gave birth to You in virginity, so
grant us Your mercies.

Ode 4.

Irmos. The Church saw You, the Sun of Justice, raised
on the cross. May her children stand in order and sing as they
ought: glory to Your power, O Lord.
You drove Your warrior steeds on the sea, O Lover of
Mankind, and they churned the waters of heresy and teach
Your pure dogma to all.
You have enlightened the minds of the Church, O starsglorious apostles, through your piety. Deliver me from the
night of sin and ignorance.
Glory:
You were made to be sharp arrows, O apostles. Cut
down the flying darts of my wickedness. Strengthen my
understanding.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Christ, through the prayers of the one who bore You,
and of the prayers of the holy apostles, heal my soul with
soothing deeds. It has been sickened by poison from the biting
enemy.

Ode 5.

Irmos. You came into the world as a light, my Lord—a
Holy Light which dispels murky ignorance from those who
faithfully praise You.
458

Service to the Holy Apostles

O glorious apostles, you are the living branches and the
ripe clusters You have watered all with the joy of spiritual
wine, O glorious apostles.
You will guide those who foolishly live in the darkness
of spiritual despair to the light of God’s commandments, O
apostles.
Glory:
Deliver us from sin in our souls, and from the coming
judgment. Deliver us from corruption and danger, blessed
apostles.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Save me, O God, since You love mankind. Save me
through the intercession of the Lady who bore You so
incomprehensibly. Save me through the prayers of Your
heavenly apostles.

Ode 6.
Irmos. I will offer a sacrifice of praise To You, O Lord.
The Church will sing to You because through Your mercy and
the blood from Your side, she has been washed clean of the
devils’ blood.
The sheep of the Good Shepherd, chosen by God Himself,
have scattered over the face of the earth. They have tamed the
ferocity of wolves by faith. It has been turned to the meekness
of sheep.
O apostles, you are the fruitful trees of the Divine Paradise.
Bring the miserable barrenness of my soul to charitable deeds.
Glory:
459

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

I was wounded by the weapon of passion and died. You
have received the power from Christ to raise the dead, O
glorious ones, so revive my pitiful and dead soul.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O generous God, calm the violent storm of my soul by the
prayers of the Theotokos who bore You, and of the apostles
and martyrs.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Lord, you have received your steadfast and inspired
preachers, the foremost of Your apostles, into the enjoyment
of Your good gifts and repose. You preferred their sufferings
and death above any sacrifice. For You alone know the secrets
of the heart.

Ode 7.

Irmos. Abraham’s children were cast into a Persian
furnace. Not from fear of the burning flames but from piety
did they sing: Blessed are You, O Lord, in the temple of Your
glory.
By the power of all-holy preaching, forthright apostles of
Christ, you defeated the winter of deceit and enlightened the
thoughts of the believers with an understanding of God.
You exude delightfully fragrant myrrh. O divine disciples,
fill those who come to you with spiritual and fragrant myrrh.
Destroy the stench of evil passion.
Glory:
Weakened by physical sickness, O glorious disciples of
the Immutable Word, save me. I cry out: Blessed are You, O
Lord, in the temple of Your glory.
460

Service to the Holy Apostles

Now and ever: Theotokion:
The choir of the martyrs and apostles, with the choir of
the angels, begs for the depth of Your mercy, O Word and
Lover of Mankind. Be generous to everyone since You are so
compassionate, through the prayers of the Theotokos.

Ode 8.
Irmos. When Daniel lifted up his hands, he shut the lion’s
mouths. These young bastions of holiness put on virtue and
quenched the power of fire. They sang: All you works of the
Lord, bless the Lord!
O fiery mouth of Christ which closed malignant mouths,
you have spoken saving doctrine. Deliver us from the mouth
of the wolf as we sing: All you works of the Lord, bless the
Lord and praise Him forever!
O harmonious Trumpets of Christ, peal over my dead
soul, O apostles. Raise me from the grave of despair and from
sin’s discouragement as I sing: All you works of the Lord,
bless the Lord, and praise Him forever!
Glory:
O Christ, through the prayers of Your disciples, do not
judge me for breaking Your laws through a lewd mind; me,
O Master, the prodigal, who descended to the depths and
succumbed to the temptations of the devil.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Lady of all creatures, O Mary, free me by your prayers,
for I am possessed by the devil. I am always sinning. Placate
Christ so that I may sing in a pure life: All you works of the
Lord, bless the Lord, and praise Him forever!
461

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ode 9.
Irmos. That stone which came untouched from an
unquarried mountain has become the cornerstone which came
from you, O Virgin. Christ took flesh and unites Himself to
creation. We rejoice in this, and we praise you, O Theotokos.
O chosen stones which have been set upon the Cornerstone,
shape the hearts of the faithful by that rock of faith which has
crushed the enemy to powder, O apostles.
You received the power to bind and loose from Christ.
Loosen the ties of my wickedness, and bind me to God’s love.
Make me an heir of the kingdom of heaven, O apostles.
Glory:
O heavenly clouds from the Master, rain on me, and make
my heart fertile. It is drying out from all kinds of evil works,
O apostles blessed by God.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
With the glorious martyrs, the heavenly apostles and the
holy angels, O Theotokos most pure, implore your Son and
God to save our souls from danger.

Prayer.
Master, Lord, Yours is the day, and Yours is the night;
all creatures serve You, and everything that lives gives glory
to You. I, a wretched one, have spent all my life prodigally.
I am possessed by fear when I remember my first days to the
present in which I committed all wicked and dissolute evil,
and that is the reason I do not have access to Your confidence
462

Service to the Holy Apostles

since my offenses are great and my sins are without limit, and
enemies are always oppressing me. But, my Lord, Lord, Who
opened the mouth of those without speech, open my mouth
that I may say in prayer what is pleasing to You. My soul is
like parched land without water, and it cannot yield its fruits.
But grant me fruit from the seed of Your Holy Spirit and water
me with the dew of Your grace that I might bring forth for
You the fruits of repentance. O Lord Jesus Christ, You Who
desire that all men be saved, listen to my prayer through the
prayers of Your holy apostles since they pray for us, and I
ask for forgiveness with confidence because of them, for You
ever listen to their prayers. Through their prayers, save me,
a sinner, heal the infirmities of my heart, cure the wounds
of my soul, burn my inner being with the fire of fear of You
that it may consume the thorns of my sins, and console my
soul with love. Because I desire You, True Light and Giver
of Light, from You alone I ask for mercy: save me! Feed my
hunger and give drink to my thirsty soul from the source of
Your boundless mercy. Cover me with the grace of Your love
for mankind from all evil so that I, protected by You, may be
freed from the snares of the wicked one for the rest of my
days, so that my enemies cannot boast over me, Your servant
who trusts in You. Save me according to Your mercy, that I
may give You my promise: until my last breath I repent over
my sins and glorify Your Most Holy Name, with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and forever. Amen.
Then, if a Moleben: It is truly proper: Trisagion. And,
after Our Father: the Troparion of the apostles. Glory: now
and ever: Theotokion. And the Dismissal.

463

Service
to Holy Bishop Nicholas
On Wednesday evening, at Lord, I have called:
Stichera, Tone 2.
According to: What crowns of praise:
(Kiimi pochval’nymi:  

)

What crowns of praise shall we confer upon the saintly
Bishop? Once present in the flesh in Myra, he is present in
spirit to all who love him purely. He is the leader and defender
of everyone, a comforter in distress and a haven of all in
danger, a pillar of piety and conqueror for believers. For his
sake, Christ overcame enemies and shows us great mercy.
With what songs of praise shall we extol the saintly
Bishop? He is the foe of wickedness. He is an outstanding
leader, a great defender and teacher of the Church. He
confounds all who show dishonor. He is the refuter of Arius
and his companions. Because of him, Christ put down their
ragings and showed great mercy.
With what hymns of prophecy shall we extol the saintly
Bishop? Living in the present, he saw far into the future. He
spoke truly about distant things as though they were near.
464

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

He oversees the whole world and delivers the afflicted. He
appeared in a dream to the God-wise king. He delivered
prisoners who were unjustly accused of murder. Today he
grants us the mercy of Christ.
Glory: Tone 6:
We have gathered together to celebrate and to praise
with song the model of bishops and a glory to the fathers, a
fountain of miracles and a great helper of believers. Let us
sing to the saintly Nicholas: Rejoice, O Protector of Myra
who was revered as its leader and strongest pillar. Rejoice, O
Radiant Star Whose light of miracles shines throughout the
world. Rejoice, O Divine Joy to those in sorrow. Rejoice, O
Defender of those who are oppressed; for even now, all-holy
Nicholas, you still pray to God for us who celebrate your feast
with faith and who honor you with zeal and joy.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Who would not extol you, most holy Virgin? Who would
not praise your giving birth without pain? For the onlybegotten Son, Who shines forth from the Father timelessly,
has himself come forth from you, O pure one. He took flesh
from you in a manner beyond understanding; retaining divine
nature, but assuming human nature for our sake; not divided
into two persons but existing in two natures distinct and
unconfused. O honored and most blessed one, beseech him to
have mercy on our souls.
At the Aposticha, Tone 5:
According to: Rejoice:
(Radujsja:
)
Rejoice, O priestly leader, spotless vessel of virtue, model
of divine priesthood, great shepherd of your flock, bearer of
465

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

the torch of victory. You hear the prayers of those who call
upon you; you grant the petitions of the poor; you deliver
all the faithful who honor your all-glorious memory. Pray to
Christ, most blessed one, that He may shower abundant mercy
on the world.
Verse: Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His
faithful. [Psalm 115:6]
Rejoice, O saintly Hierarch, pure temple of the Trinity;
pillar of the Church, protector of the faithful, helper of all in
trouble. You are a star whose rays of prayer dispel the darkest
trouble. O holy father Nicholas, you are a quiet harbor for the
storm-tossed, for all adrift in the sea of life. Pray to Christ to
save our souls with his great mercy.
Verse: Your priests will be clothed with holiness; Your
faithful shall ring out their joy. [Psalm 131:9]
Rejoice, O man filled with divine zeal. You appeared in a
dream, and you saved from death the ones unjustly sentenced.
You are a fountain in Myra, O Nicholas, overflowing with
precious myrrh. You inspire us to keep from sin. You are a
sword that cuts down the weeds of error; you proved Arius to
be a false teacher. Pray to Christ to save our souls in His great
mercy.
Glory: Tone 6:
O man of God, O faithful servant of the Lord, you are a
chosen vessel filled with desire for God. You are a pillar and a
foundation of the Church; you are an heir of the kingdom. [O
holy Father Nicholas,] pray to the Lord for us.
466

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, you are the True Vine who gave birth to the
Fruit of Life: wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede
together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain
mercy for our souls.
_________________________________________________
If a Moleben, then:
Lord, have mercy, 12. Glory: now and ever: Come,
let us worship: Three times. Psalm 142: Lord, listen to my
prayer: Glory: now and ever: Alleluia. Three times.
_________________________________________________
If it is Matins, then: The Lord is God:
Then Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and archbishop Nicholas, intercede with
Christ our God to save our souls.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
The mystery hidden from all ages and unknown to the
angels has been made known to those on earth through you, O
Theotokos. God has taken flesh in a union without confusion,
and willingly accepted the cross for us; whereby He raised the
first-formed Adam and saved our souls from death.
Lord, have mercy. Three times, and
Psalm 50.
467

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

CANON.
Tone 4. Ode 1.
Irmos. I will open my mouth. It will be filled by the
Spirit, and I will offer words of praise to the Queen Mother. I
will celebrate solemnly in radiance. In rejoicing, I will sing of
these wonders.
Versicle: Holy Father Nicholas, pray to God for us.
Rejoice, Nicholas, good shepherd of Christ’s flock. You
were a teacher and father dear to Myra’s people. Grant me to
praise you, also: rejoice!
All generations of the earth gathered to sing “Rejoice,” O
Bishop, for you bring joy abundantly to the universe.
Glory:
Since you delivered three generals from unjust execution,
we sing to you: Rejoice, Nicholas, defender of those who run
to your protection.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, Virgin Theotokos. You received joy from the
angel, so save those who extol you.

Ode 3.
Irmos. O Theotokos, O living and overflowing fountain,
strengthen those who assembled in a spiritual choir to sing
hymns of praise to you, and, in the feast of your conception of
the Divine One, grant to them the crowns of glory.
No one who seeks the shelter of your trust goes away
empty-handed, father. By greeting you, one receives help, O
Nicholas. Grant me your help as well, O all-blessed one.
468

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

O venerable father, the angels marvel at your ardent care.
The people rejoice because they have been delivered from
diabolical temptations through your prayers. Therefore, we
offer praise to you: Rejoice, O praiseworthy Nicholas.
Glory:
You are a helmet and an armor of invulnerability against
the devil. You are a fortress for Christians and an inspiration
for hierarchs. Rejoice, O wonderful Nicholas, great
wonderworker and calm harbor of the storm-tossed.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You conceived your own Creator, O Theotokos, and you
gave birth to the Lord and Creator of all. Pray to Him to lead
us from adversity, for you accomplish everything you want,
because you are the gracious Mother of the gracious Lord.

Ode 4.
Irmos. He Who sits in glory on the throne of the Godhead,
Jesus the true God, has come on a mystical cloud. With His
incorrupt hand He saves those who sing: glory to your power,
O Christ!
At the throne you are equal to any apostle. Rejoice,
Nicholas, for you have shamed the heresy of Arius. You
subdued the violent babble of Belial by your prayers. Do not
cease to pray for your servants.
You delivered a child from the hands of the Saracen Emir,
and you gave joy to his parents. Therefore, together with
them, we sing to you: Rejoice!
Glory:
O Wonderworker, you saved three generals from unjust
469

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

execution. You appeared in a dream to the pious king, and
you forbade him to do it, so you received the praise: “Rejoice,
O Nicholas!” from them. strengthen me, also, through your
prayers.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, most blessed Theotokos, for you are the throne
of the King of all. You are more exalted than the cherubim. Do
not delay, but, with blessed Nicholas, ever pray to your Son
and our God in behalf of those who venerate you.

Ode 5.
Irmos. The universe was in awe at your divine glory, for
you, O Virgin who has not known wedlock, have borne in
your womb the God of all and have given birth to an Eternal
Son, you who grants peace to those who sing to you.
O chosen Apostle of God, you stand on an equal footing
with the angels before the throne of God. You shamed that
fool, Arius. Therefore, we sing to you: Rejoice, O Nicholas,
inspiration of bishops and pillar of the Church.
O Nicholas, extend a helping hand to me. Pray to the
Lord, for I am drowning in a storm of my sin. Lead me to a
calm harbor of penance by your prayers, O father.
Glory:
Despite my many sins, O Nicholas, I never abandoned
hope for your protection. I always rejoice in you. Deliver me
from all trouble and sorrow, for you can do whatever you will.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, highest Cloud in the heavens. You give us the
rain, O all-blessed Theotokos. With the hierarch, Nicholas, we
pray that God may grant our rulers victory over barbarians.
470

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

Ode 6.

Irmos. By divine inspiration, the God-wise celebrate
this all-honorable and God-given feast of the Mother of God.
Come, clap your hands, and let us praise God Whom she bore.
You have been revealed as a second Peter and a friend of
Christ, O father. Rejoice, for you are a pillar of the Church and
a wondrous trumpet. You work miracles and resound with the
Holy Spirit. Therefore, O Nicholas, we always sing to you:
Rejoice!
In a dream the pious king Constantine and the eparch
Ablabius heard your warning about the men they intended
to execute unjustly. He immediately commanded them to be
released, and he cried out to you, Nicholas: Rejoice!
Glory:
You became the pilot of that floundering ship at sea, O
father. Put a good thought in my mind and heart when I am
tossed on the waves of the devil’s thoughts, so that I may
always praise you: Rejoice, Nicholas, worthy of praise.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, most pure Virgin. Rejoice, fortress of the world.
Rejoice to you who gave birth to a Son Who is the God of all.
Now beseech Him O all-immaculate Theotokos, to save our souls.

Ode 7.

Irmos. Wise in God, they served no creature in place of
God. They overcame the flaming menace with confidence.
They rejoiced and sang: Blessed are You and praiseworthy, O
Lord and God of our fathers!
O holy Nicholas, O bishop of Christ, rejoice! You are
unspeakable joy to all. Give me a helping hand that I too may
say: Rejoice, all-blessed one.
471

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

When the generals heard that you had them freed, they
took candles to you, singing with a loud voice: Rejoice,
venerable father, our deliverance!
Glory:
At one time you heard those chained in prison. Hear me
also, Nicholas, and rescue me from the fire of Gehenna. I sing
to you: rejoice!
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Lady Mary, Mother of the Savior, deliver me, I am
repenting, and I come quickly under your protection. I
ceaselessly cry out to you: Rejoice, Full of Grace, O EverVirgin Theotokos.

Ode 8.

Irmos. The Offspring of the maternity of the Theotokos
saved the three young men in the furnace. Then, it was a
mystic type, but now it is fulfilled and it gathers the whole
universe to sing to you: All you works of the Lord, praise and
exalt Him forever.
You are enthroned with the apostles. You serve the Trinity
with the angels. Rejoice most-praiseworthy Nicholas! Grant
me joy through your prayers.
Rejoice, O Nicholas, helmsman of those caught in the
storm. Calm the storm of my passions arising from the devil.
I cannot bear them any longer. I call out: Rejoice, my helper
and my steadfast intercessor.
Glory:
How much sadness fills me because of those flying arrows
of the devil. I cannot bear the wounds! There is no doctor
to bandage me. But apply the oil of your prayers and the
bandage of your intercession, O Nicholas, and let me call to
you: Rejoice, O venerable father.
472

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, unburnt bush which Moses saw, and Sinai
and ladder which Jacob saw, most-blessed and Ever-Virgin
Theotokos.

Ode 9.
Irmos. Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let
the bodiless powers solemnly celebrate in honor of the sacred
feast. O Mother of God, let them cry out: Rejoice, ever-blessed
Theotokos and pure Ever-Virgin.
Sinful desires and the piercing arrows of the tempter
possess me. Hoping for your protection, O Father, I run to
you. Dispel the deceitfulness of the evil one from me, so that
I may sing to you: Rejoice, O Nicholas.
You made a fool of Arius. You extinguished the blaze of
heresy. You heard the generals chained in prison and accepted
their rejoicing. They praise you, and we sing to you: Rejoice,
Nicholas, all-blessed one.
Glory:
You heard the prayers of Agricus, and rescued his son
Basil from the Emir. You restored him from the Saracens to
his parents safe in one moment. As for me, who pray to you,
free my sick soul from the fire of Gehenna, for it is covered
with sin and sorely grieved, O Nicholas.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You are the Queen who gave birth to the King of the
universe. You bore Him Who bears creation. Save me, most
holy Lady, who extol you.
473

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Hymn of Light
According to: O Women hear:
(Ženy uslyšite:  

)

Let us all praise Nicholas, the great shepherd, bishop,
and leader of Myra, for he saved many who were unjustly
condemned to death. He also appeared to the emperor and
Ablabius in a dream, putting an end to the unjust decree.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O Virgin, you gave birth to Christ, Wisdom personified,
the ever-existing Word, and Healer of all. Heal the wounds of
my soul and remove from my heart all lustful thoughts.
At the Praises, the Stichera, Tone 5:
According to: Rejoice, of those who fast:
)
(Radujsja postnikov:
Rejoice, O bright star of the eternal light of the Master!
Rejoice, radiance of the mystical light, O bishop of Christ,
Nicholas! Hasten, father, and send up your most pure
supplications in my behalf to the Lord, that He delivers me
from every misfortune and heals my unbearable pains! Since
you are our intercessor, I cry out to you with a repentant heart
and faith: pray to Christ, that He grants me great mercy.
Rejoice, O priestly leader, spotless vessel of virtue, model
of divine priesthood, great shepherd of your flock, bearer of
the torch of victory. You hear the prayers of those who call
upon you; you grant petitions of the poor; you rescue all those
who praise your name. Now I ask you to implore Christ that
He save all the faithful who sing to your memory.
474

Service to Holy Bishop Nicholas

Glory: the same tone:
Rejoice, model of bishops, O steady source of divine
miracles, O beauty of the Church, O bright star who illumines
everyone by your priestly radiance. O blessed one, you
enlighten us in bright flashes of lightning, most holy one and
unshakable pillar. O rule of faith for those who remember you
with love, beg Christ to give our souls great mercy.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Rejoice, O seal of prophets and preacher of the Godpreaching apostles. For you, O pure One, gave birth to the
true God, Who became incarnate beyond all understanding
or words. Therefore, having received from Him the original
dignity and enjoying the delights of paradise, we venerate
you with hymns as the mediatrix of such a distinction and as
a powerful supplicator. Having become enriched by you, O
most pure One, we have become worthy of the everlasting life
of your Son, Who generously grants us His great mercy.

Prayer to Saint Nicholas.

O all-holy Nicholas, pre-eminent servant of the Lord, our
warm-hearted Protector, and Helper swift to assist those in
troubles everywhere, help me who am a sinner and dejected
in this present life. Implore the Lord God to grant me release
from all my sins, for from my youth and in all my life I
have sinned by deed, in word and thought, and with all my
emotions. At the departure of my soul, help me, a pitiful
being: beg the Lord God Who is the Creator of every living
being to free me from defrauding like the publican and from
everlasting torment, so that I may praise always the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, and your merciful intercession, now and
ever and forever. Amen.

475

Service to the
Precious and Life-Creating
Cross of Christ
On Tuesday and Thursday evening, at O Lord, I have
cried: the stichera to the cross, Tone 3.
According to: Great is the power of Your cross:
(Velija Kresta Tvojeho:
)
Creation was sanctified through the most sacred blood
which flowed from Your side, O only long-suffering One; the
rivers of idolatry dried up and Adam was freed from the curse
through Your crucifixion, O Word.
The Creator and Lord and God of all willingly humbles
Himself and suffers for mankind by being lifted upon the
cross, because of the curse of the Law.
You willingly gave Yourself up to be crucified, O Lord our
Benefactor. Pierced in the side with a lance, O Giver of life,
You poured forth two fountains of immortality; therefore, we
constantly praise in faith Your sufferings, O Most Generous
One!

476

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

Glory: now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
Most pure Lady, a sword pierced your heart when you saw
your Son on the cross. You cried: Do not make me childless,
my Son and my God, since You have kept me a virgin after
Your birth.
At the Aposticha, the stichera to the cross,
Tone 3:
We bow to Your most precious cross, O Christ, the
Guardian of the world, the Salvation of us sinners, the great
Propitiation, the Triumph of kings, and the Glory of the
universe.
Verse: Exalt the Lord our God and worship at His
footstool; for He is holy. [Psalm 98:5]
Lifting up his arms in the form of a cross on the mountain,
Moses vanquished Amalek; and You, O Savior, stretched Your
arms upon the venerable cross and embraced me, saving me
from the bondage of the enemy. You gave me a living sign,
that I might escape the arrows of my adversaries. Therefore,
O Word, I bow down before Your precious cross.
Verse: God is our King from all ages; He has accomplished
salvation in the middle of the earth. [Psalm 73:12]
The tree we heard of first brought death into the world!
The tree of the cross brought life and incorruption. We bow
to You for this, O crucified Lord. May the light of Your face
shine on us!

477

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Starvotheotokion:
The immaculate Mother who gave You birth saw You as
a Lamb when You were lifted upon the cross, my Christ. She
mourned tearfully and groaned: Do not make me childless,
since You have kept me a virgin after Your birth.
_________________________________________________
If it is a Moleben, then:
Lord, have mercy, Twelve. [Glory: now and ever:] Come,
let us worship: three. Psalm 142: Lord, listen to my prayer:
Glory: now and ever: Alleluia, three.
_________________________________________________
If it is Matins, then:
The Lord is God, and has revealed Himself to us:
Then the Troparion of the cross, Tone 1:
Save Your people, O Lord, and bless your inheritance.
Grant victory to your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Glory: now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
O Pure One, we have obtained your protection. Through
your intercession, we have been kept from harm and
surrounded at all times with the grace of your Son’s cross.
Therefore, we exalt you with great devotion.

Psalm 50:
Have mercy on me, God:

478

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

CANON.
A composition of Gregory of Sinai.
Tone 4. Ode 1.
Irmos. I will open my mouth. It will be filled by the
Spirit, and I will offer words of praise to the Queen Mother. I
will celebrate solemnly in radiance. In rejoicing, I will sing of
these wonders.
Versicle: Glory to Your precious cross, O Lord!
Almighty cross, praise of apostles, strength of venerable
men and women, sign of the faithful, glory of hierarchs and
martyrs, victory and rampart of all who praise you.
O all-precious cross, O power spread in four directions of
the compass! O beauty of apostles, O strength of martyrs, you
prove yourself the health of the sick, the resurrection of the
dead, and the exaltation of the fallen.
Glory:
O cross, you are the strength, power, and authority to
me. You are a general against my warring foes, a redeemer, a
fortress, and victory. You ever protect and sustain me.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
All-immaculate Lady, when you saw your Son on the
cross, a sword of sorrow cut into your womb. You groaned
and wept, but immediately you praised the power of the cross.

Ode 3.
Irmos. O Theotokos, O living and overflowing fountain,
strengthen those who assembled in a spiritual choir to sing
479

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

hymns of praise to you, and, in the feast of your conception of
the Divine One, grant to them the crowns of glory.
O cross, armor of venerable men and women and doubleedged sword of Christ. O health and sustenance of the sick.
O nourishment of the faithful, and resurrection of the dead, O
all-precious cross.
O cross, foundation of piety, you have become the
destruction of devils, the splendor of the churches, the
damnation of the wicked, and bitterness for foes on the Day
of Judgment.
Glory:
O life-giving cross, be my strength, and victory, and
shield. Be an unassailable wall, an exorcism for devils, the
abolition of evil thoughts, and salvation of my mind.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
Virgin Lady, your Son suffered an infamous crucifixion
and a shameful death, but He rose. He overthrew the hostile
might of the enemy, for He is the Immortal One.
Sessional Hymn Tone 8:
According to: Mystical command:
(Povel’innoje tajno:  

)

In ancient times, Joshua son of Nun mystically prefigured
the sign of the cross when he extended his hands in the form
of a cross and the sun stood still until the enemy rebelling
against You, their God, were routed. Now, my Savior, as You
ascended the cross, You crushed the power of death and raised
the universe.
480

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

Ode 4.
Irmos. He Who sits in glory on the throne of the Godhead,
Jesus the true God, has come on a mystical cloud. With His
incorrupt hand He saves those who sing: Glory to Your power,
O Christ!
The cross, in the four ends of the world, and like a threeedged sword, you cut down the leaders of darkness. O cross,
we see you as the great armor of Christ and invincible,
almighty victory!
Your upright beam, O life-giving cross, slays the king of
the winds and the serpents in the bottom of the pit. Your cross
beam spans the earth, laying low the king of the world in Your
might!
Glory:
When you were lifted up, you drew up the fallen. You
elevated earthly nature. You were glorified before the throne
of God. O cross—bridge across the world and mighty height—
raise my soul quickly from the depths of passion.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
Most pure handmaiden, O Theotokos, you raise your
hands in the form of a cross to Him Who hung upon a cross.
O Virgin, now offer prayer for all who faithfully pray to you.

Ode 5.
Irmos. The universe was in awe at your divine glory, for
you, O Virgin who has not known wedlock have borne in your
womb the God of all and have given birth to an Eternal Son
Who grants salvation to those who praise you.
481

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O cross, heavenly ladder, master for the stairway for the
saints, you are the height and glory of Christ. You are the
prophesied image of God for the visible and invisible worlds,
O only precious cross.
O cross, O image indescribable in power, you are the
sanctification of waters, the purification of the air, the
sanctification and enlightenment for everything. You are a
sign of courage and Christ’s invincible scepter by which He
casts His enemies down to the ground.
Glory:
Almighty cross, put down the malicious enemies who so
foolishly hate and blaspheme you. Burn their tongues, crush
their satanic intrigues, O all-holy and Christ-bearing cross,
guard us in your might!
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
O Theotokos Queen of all, by the scepter of your birthgiving, O Virgin, subdue the rebellion of those who curse the
power of the cross. Give strength and purification, be an ally
and help to our government (or our believing kings).

Ode 6.
Irmos. Let us celebrate this divine and all-precious feast
of the Theotokos. Come, clap your hands. Let us praise the
God she bore.
The cross is the resurrection of all. The cross is the
correction of the fallen, the death of passion, the transfixing
of the agitations of the flesh. The cross is glory and eternal
light for souls.
482

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

The cross is the destruction of enemies. The cross is the
affliction and imprisonment of the malicious. The cross is the
authority of the faithful, the guardian of the pious and the
dispersion of the devils.
Glory:
The cross is the destruction of passion. The cross is the
purge of evil thoughts. The cross is the repentance of the
seducing tongue and has become a trap for devils.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion.
The cross has been exalted, and the order of evil spirits of
the air fall down. The cross descends. The godless tremble; to
them the power of the cross is lightning!

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.

Ikos:
He, who was caught up in the third heaven to Paradise
and who heard unspeakable and divine words which human
beings cannot express, wrote to the Galatians. Study the
Scripture, and you will read and understand what he wrote:
God forbid that I should glory in anything except the cross of
the Lord on which He suffered the passion. Therefore, let us
continue to praise this cross of the Lord with confidence, for it
is the glory of us all. This Wood is our salvation, a weapon of
peace, and an invincible trophy of victory.
483

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ode 7.
Irmos. Wise in God, they served no creature in place of
God. They overcame the flaming menace with confidence.
They rejoiced and sang: blessed are You and praiseworthy, O
Lord and God of our fathers!
We sing hymns to the Trinity, undivided and of one divine
Nature: to the Unbegotten Father, the only-begotten Son, and
the Holy Spirit Who proceeds spoken from Divinity: Blessed
are You, O God of our fathers!
By Your unfading lightning flashes, illumine the eyes
of our mind to see Your ever-subsisting goodness, which is
unfathomable to humans and unapproachable to angels, O
Tri-hypostatic God, O Triune Light!
Glory:
My fallen soul is turning away from the light of grace and
plunging deeper into darkness. Lead it out of the pit by the
rays of Your light, good God most praiseworthy and exalted.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
O pure Lady, you stretched out your hands in the form of
a cross to Him Who spread His hands out on the tree of the
cross. He raised our nature and put to death the enemy camp.
Do not cease praying for us.

Ode 8.
Irmos. The Offspring of the maternity of the Theotokos
saved the three young men in the furnace. Then, it was a
mystic type, but now it is fulfilled, and it gathers the whole
universe to sing to you: all you works of the Lord, praise and
exalt Him forever.
484

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

O victory-bearing cross, you manifested yourself as the
pinnacle of Christ’s suffering, and a bow, and armor, and a
sword, an unfailing weapon, and an invincible power, and
Christ’s footstool and pledge of victory over enemies, a sign
of the Kingdom, the scepter of the faithful.
You raised our fallen nature. You revived those who had
been crucified with Christ, O heavenly height, O unutterable
depth! You are the mark of Christ—most enriching cross,
O expanse beyond measure. You are the sign of the
incomprehensible Trinity, O life-giving cross.
Glory:
Come, now, let us rise and rejoice. Let us kiss the cross of
the Lord with our lips, our soul, and our heart. As we venerate
the cross, let us sing this most pure hymn together: Rejoice, O
treasure of great riches. Rejoice, O glory of the Church.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
This is the tree of life and salvation, the tree of
immortality, the tree of understanding, the tree thriceloveable, incorruptible, and indestructible. The three-barred
cross is the precious Tree because it bears the image of the
three hypostases of the Trinity.

Ode 9.
Irmos. Let all the earthly born dance for joy in spirit.
Let the bodiless powers solemnly celebrate in honor of the
sacred feast. O Mother of God, let them cry out: Rejoice, everblessed Theotokos and pure Ever-Virgin.

485

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O peace-bearing cross, who will spread the news of your
deeds, the miracles and power, the raising of the dead? When
you were lifted up for the often-willing God, you raised all the
world with you!
The thrice-blessed cross is the fortress of the faithful, the
sign and glory, the all-powerful Tree, the great and perfect
cross of Christ. You are the praise of the apostles, the fortress
of the venerable men and women, the might and authority of
martyrs and the glory and might of rulers.
Glory:
Rejoice, O cross, most excellent and majestic and
uninscribable image, O Tree of triple wealth, majestic and
all-blessed. Rejoice, O cross, all-holy and almighty. Rejoice,
guardian of our lives, O greatly-hymned cross of the Lord.
Now and ever: Stavrotheotokion:
O precious cross, be the guardian of my soul and body,
lay low the demon by your image. Drive away enemies,
overthrow passions, give me blessings and life and power
through the action of the Holy Spirit and through the precious
prayers of the Immaculate Lady.

Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, Creator of
heaven and earth, Savior of the world: Behold, I, the unworthy
one, and the one more sinful than everyone else, I bend the
knees of my heart before the glory of Your majesty. I praise
and magnify Your limitless suffering and give thanks to You,
the King and God of all, since it pleased You to willingly
come down from Your heavenly throne, and become incarnate
486

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

of the Most Holy Virgin Mary for the salvation of the human
race. Being bodiless, You united divinity to flesh. Being rich,
You voluntarily became poor in order to enrich Man in Your
kingdom. As man, You brought on Yourself the toils and every
misfortune of the human state in order to assist in every sorrow
and need. You Who fasted forty days showed everyone the
way to moderation. Multiple times You were tested by the evil
one; You free everyone from every temptation.
I know, all-powerful Master, that You did not need all of
this, yet You suffered for the sake of the salvation of the human
race. You were betrayed for thirty pieces of silver to redeem
mankind from the oppressive weight of hostile slavery. Being
maltreated by ruthless people as the Innocent Lamb, You
liberated the human race from the destruction of the spiritual
cruel man. Being presented before the judgment seat of Annas
and Caiaphas, You freed everyone from the eternal fire. Being
bound, mocked, spat upon, defamed by false witnesses, and
condemned to an infamous death, You freed mankind from
every assault, suffering, and eternal death. Being given over
to Pilate although You did not commit any evil, and sent to
Herod, and again mocked, You freed mankind from the state
of evil and from hostile mockeries.
I do not know what can I return to You, O Master and
Lover of Mankind, for all that You have suffered for me, a
sinner. My soul and body, and all good, are from You, and
what is mine is Yours, and I am Yours. I hope only in Your
unmeasurable compassion, merciful Lord; I praise Your
mercy without limits by which You laid down for me in my
condemned state, in order for me to be justified.
Bound to the pillar, O Savior, and beaten without mercy,
O Merciful One, I pray: absolve me from my sins. Crowned
487

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

with thorns, uproot the sinful thorns of my soul. Beaten upon
the head with the rod, destroy the head of the serpent that
is wounding me with the sting of sin. Dressed in the red
vestment and handed over to the torturers, illumine, O Most
Holy King, my spiritual vestment, so that I may enter into
Your all-beautiful chamber. Being exchanged for robbers and
having brought the cross upon Your shoulders, cast away by
Your cross the robber enemy who is seeking to destroy my
soul. I know that You, long-suffering Jesus, were extremely
tortured: from the top of Your holy head to Your feet, there
was no place undamaged on You.
And what shall I say about Your ineffable love for mankind,
O Christ the Savior? With the grief of my heart, I bow down
to Your most pure sufferings and, by kissing them with all my
love, I cry out: Have mercy on me, a sinner. Having willed to
be nailed to the cross, nail my heart to Your commandments.
Exalted on the cross on the height of Golgotha, raise my
thoughts to heaven, that I may always ponder that which is
on high. Having drunk the gall and vinegar, sweeten my heart
so grieved by sin with Your love; and, being thirsty, give me
to drink with the spring of Your sweetness. Having opened
Your hands to accept everyone, accept me, a sinner. Having
Your feet nailed, always be with sinners; be with me, a sinner,
keeping my feet from every wicked path. Having an open
heart, show me, a sinner, Your grace. Having bowed Your
most holy head on the cross, listen to my unworthy prayers.
O most marvelous and immeasurable depth of mercy,
Christ God, Who prayed to God the Father for Your enemies
who crucified You, grant to me, a sinner, the grace to love my
enemies and pray for them. Having opened paradise to the
thief who repented, look, my Light, upon me, a sinner; give
488

Service to the Precious and Life-Creating Cross of Christ

me repentance, and open to me the doors of Your mercy and
remember me, the unworthy one, in Your kingdom.
At the end, having delivered Your most Holy Spirit into
the hands of God the Father, accept, O Creator, my spirit at
the time of my death. Being taken down from the cross and
placed as dead in the tomb, O Savior, living in the inaccessible
world, take away from me the heavy sinful burden; and do
not disdain, O Lover of Mankind, to dwell in the tomb of
my unworthy heart in order to put to death my rational flesh.
So that I do not live by myself, Your creature, but with You,
my Lord and God. I hope in Your mercy, O Merciful One,
to see You, my Creator and Savior, Who is crowned with
glory and honor in the world of Your inaccessible glory for
accepting death on a cross, where You reign before the ages
with Your Father Who is without beginning, and Your most
Holy, gracious, and Life-giving, Spirit, one in essence, now
and ever and forever. Amen.
It is truly proper: Trisagion. And after Our Father:
Troparion: Save your people, O Lord: Glory: now and ever:
Stavrotheotokion.
And the Dismissal.

489

Service
to All Saints
On Friday evening, at: Lord, I have cried: the stichera,
Tone 8:
Today all the faithful commemorate the forefathers. Sing
with fervor a hymn of praise to Christ the Savior Who exalted
them among all nations. He is the Lord Who does wondrous
deeds, because He is powerful and mighty. From them He
brought forth a royal scepter, the immaculate maiden of God
and virgin Mary. From her, Christ our God came forth to give
life and eternal salvation for all.
The prophets and apostles of Christ and the martyrs have
taught us to hymn the Trinity, One in essence. They have
enlightened mistaken peoples, and have given to the children
of humans a communion with the angels.
You hierarchs for the Lord, who have spread the holy and
divine Word, crush all heterodox and heretical words. You
have become the first laborers for the faithful; for this we
venerate you.
O God bearing fathers, you are like the orders of the
bodiless angels. In a physical body you mirror their life. For
this you have gone to live with them.
490

Service to All Saints

Glory: Tone 4:
You have confidence before the Savior, O saints.
Therefore, pray for us sinners. Never cease your pleading, for
the forgiveness of our sins and for great mercy for our souls.
Now and ever:
O inextinguishable Candle, O Throne of Justice, O most
pure Lady: pray for the salvation of our souls.
At the Aposticha, Tone 7:
O saints, we pray that you intercede to God to give us
remission of our sins and to deliver our souls from future
torment and from bitter death.
Verse: God is wondrous in his saints, the God of Israel.
[Psalm 67:36]
O martyrs of the Lord we pray that you implore our God
for an abundance of grace for our souls, and the remission of
our many sins.
Verse: To all the saints in His land, the Lord has shown all
the wonders of His will. [Psalm 15:3]
You are the perfect refuge and shelter of our souls, a
protection against devils. O you apostles who have seen God
the Lord. Therefore, we venerate you always with the prophets
and hierarchs.
Glory: Tone 8:
O forefathers, we solemnly celebrate your memory. We
extol your God-pleasing life, through which you have been
glorified. Pray to the Lord for the salvation of our souls.
491

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever:
O Most Pure One, you are the praise of the martyrs,
of the prophets, of the apostles, of the hierarchs, of the
venerables, and of all the saints and righteous forever.
Therefore, we implore you: pray with them to the Lord for the
salvation of our souls.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, you always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion.
The mystery hidden from all ages and unknown to the
angels has been made known to those on earth through you, O
Theotokos. God has taken flesh in a union without confusion,
and willingly accepted the cross for us; whereby He raised the
first-formed Adam and saved our souls from death.

CANON
Tone 8. Ode 1.
Irmos. Let us sing a hymn to our wondrous God, O
people, because He delivered Israel from slavery. Let us sing
the hymn of victory, crying: We sing to You, our only Master.
Versicle: All you saints, pray to God for us.
O assembly of prophets, company of apostles, and army
of martyrs, I am possessed by many transgressions. Pray the
Master of all to save me.
O assembly of hierarchs, all you venerable and righteous
men and women, I believe that you are truly blessed. Pray that
492

Service to All Saints

all who faithfully praise you may gain the eternal blessing.
Glory:
O Lord, we sing to the order of all Your saints. You
have enlightened us through their prayers. For You are the
unapproachable Light, and You dispel the fog of ignorance by
Your everlasting brightness.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Most holy Virgin Mother, you are the sanctification of all,
for you gave birth to the most holy Word. Sanctify those who
pray to you with all the saints.

Ode 3.
Irmos. O Lord, You are the rampart of those who flee to
You. You are the light of those who are blind. My soul sings
to You.
We extol you, the priestly choir of divine prophets. We
greatly honor those who suffered martyrdom. We offer this
prayer: Through all your prayers, grant that we too may share
in the glory you have obtained!
Holy hierarchs of Christ, precious community of monks;
we pray you and all the saints to implore God, the Lover of
Mankind, on our behalf.
Glory:
The assembly of Your peacemakers, having been obedient
to Your law, has been illumined with rich virtue. They have
become heirs of Your heavenly kingdom for this, O Master
and King. Through their prayers, O all-merciful One, settle
us there also.
493

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Theotokion:
O God-delighted Pure One, pray to the Lord with all the
prophets, the wise apostles, the priest-martyrs, and all the
righteous, that He grant us the perfect remission of our sins.

Ode 4.
Irmos. O Lord, I have heard of the mystery of your plan
of salvation and I meditated on all your works, that is why I
give glory to Your divinity.
We praise the prophets who spoke of God. We sing to
you, the apostles who saw God, with the whole company of
those who have completed the race for the Lord. May we also
be enabled to run the race of our life victoriously by your
prayers.
Like the twinkling stars, you shine with the radiance of
virtue and brighten the deeds of the faithful, O our venerable
fathers. For this reason, we bless you and all His peacemakers.
Glory:
The assembly of Your saints has come together, O Lord.
They have been delighted with love. With the angels they
chant of You, omniscient Lord of all. May their hymns, and
through the prayers of all the peacemakers, make us worthy of
You, O Almighty One.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
All-holy one, you gave birth to the only-incarnate God.
Beg Him to save us on that terrible day. Implore Him to make
us worthy of life eternal and the light which is the reward of
those who have pleased Him.
494

Service to All Saints

Ode 5.
Irmos. Early in the morning we praise You: Save us, Lord,
for You are our God, and we know no other besides You.
Hierarchs, prophets, venerable and God-bearing fathers,
enlighten all creation with the rays of the Spirit. We pray you
to dispel the darkness of our passions.
Your wounds and ulcerations have become incurable
ulcerations for the enemy. Today the sufferings of the Lord
heal the ulcerations of all the faithful.
Glory:
O Lord, You enlightened Your hierarchs and priestmartyrs, and all the saints. Through their prayers be gracious
with me. You know my immeasurable sins.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Most pure Virgin, you are the praise of the martyrs and
the venerable men and women, and the righteous, and all
the saints. Deliver me, I pray you, from all hostile evil of the
betrayer.

Ode 6.

Irmos. Grant to me a robe of light, O most Merciful Christ
our God. You clothe yourself with light as with a garment.
You appear like the star-bright dawn upon the earth, most
glorious armor-bearers of Christ and righteous hierarchs. You
have enlightened the faithful with the light of your virtue.
You were killed by many wounds. You inherited eternal
life. Therefore, O you holy martyrs pray to Christ to save all
the faithful.
495

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
O Christ, You are the glory of the most-wise hierarchs,
the venerable men and women, and all the saints. Through
their prayers, be compassionate with Your people. For You
acquired them by Your blood and love for mankind.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You rejoice in God, O Lady, and we the faithful sing to
you. You gave birth to the ever-hymned God. Pray to Him to
preserve your city and its people in peace, O most pure one.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
To You, O Lord, Gardener of all creation, the world
offers the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature.
Through their prayers and through the Theotokos, preserve
Your Church, Your dwelling place, in perfect peace, O most
merciful One.

Ikos:
Those who have borne witness over all the earth have
now become citizens of heaven; having imitated the Passion
of Christ, they deliver us from our passions. They are reunited
today in the world beyond, and they show how the Church of
the First-born bears the image of the heavenly assembly. To
Christ, they cry out: You are my God. Through the one who
gave you birth, O Lord, preserve me, O Most Merciful One.

Ode 7.
Irmos. The pious God-fearing young men did not bow
down to the golden idol in Babylon, but they were showered
with dew in the midst of the furnace flames, and singing a
hymn, they said: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers, and
praised and exalted forever.
496

Service to All Saints

You delight in the heavenly banquet, O orders of saints.
You praise the One Who rests among the holy ones with a
great voice, and rejoicing, you sing: Blessed are You, O God
of our fathers.
Brightly-radiant hierarchs, and the righteous ones, and the
prophets, worthy-wonderworking priest-martyrs, and those
who have shown forth light in fasting, ever pray for us that we
receive mercy from the One to Whom we sing: Blessed are
You, O God of our fathers.
Glory:
We rejoice and praise the assembly of all Your saints, O
Lord, who have been gathered from all over the world, and
out of every nation. We praise them, with their virtues and
deeds, and we sing to You: Blessed are You, O God of our
fathers.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O most pure one, with the martyrs, with the venerable
fathers, with the prophets and all the saints, implore the One
Who rests among the saints to sanctify all of us who glorify
you forever.

Ode 8.
Irmos. The young men, speaking in behalf of God in the
furnace, ignored the flaming fire. They sang: All you works of
the Lord, bless the Lord!
O holy fathers, prophets, apostles, martyrs, and all you
saints, you have completed the spiritual warfare. You have
arrived to the holy dwelling with the angels. With them ask
absolution and great mercy for us all.
497

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

O venerable men and women, you have mortified the
flesh by many sufferings. You have been made worthy of the
coming life. You have pleased God. We pray you to pray that
we, too, may obtain the same life.
Glory:
Your priests, O Christ, are clothed reverently with
righteousness, and all the saints of all ages now rejoice
together. [cf. Psalm 131:9]. Now they see the divine goodness
more clearly, O Lover of Mankind; make us worthy to see it
through the intercession of all Your saints.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O pure Theotokos, join with all the prophets, and martyrs,
and the venerable ones and priest-martyrs, and with all the
saints to pray to the all-merciful Savior to be merciful to us.

Ode 9.
Irmos. We who have been saved through you profess
that you are truly the Theotokos, O pure Virgin, and with the
choirs of the bodiless ones we extol you.
With holy hymns we bless the shepherds in their priestly
work, the choir of holy prophets, the countless number of
ascetics, the assembly of martyrs, fasters, virgins, and all the
saints. Implore the Master of all to save our souls.
You are priests of His mysteries and ministers of the
Master. You have joined the ministers of heaven. We beg you
to pray with us for us.
Glory:
We extol the venerable men and women and righteous
ones, with the virgins and the holy women who led exemplary
lives, in the company of the priest-martyrs, and all the
prophets. O Christ, deliver our souls from hell.
498

Service to All Saints

Now and ever: Theotokion:
You gave birth in the flesh to the generous and loving
God. With all the saints ever pray Him to save us from danger,
O pure Virgin and Mother, for we bless you always.
At the Stichera of the Praises, Tone 4:
O Lord, all creation celebrates the memory of your saints.
The heavens with the angels rejoice and the earth with its
people are glad. Through their prayers, have mercy on us.
O glorious apostles, who enlightened the universe, we
pray to you: always pray to Christ our Lord and God to save
our souls.
We pray to you, O praiseworthy prophets who stand
before the throne of God, we praise your precious memory.
Pray fervently that God give us enlightenment, wisdom, and
faith.
Glory:
You are the glory, O Christ, of the ancient patriarchs,
the famed prophets, the all-praised apostles, the victorious
martyrs, the wise hierarchs, and all the priest-teachers, the
diligent choir of venerables, all the ranks of the righteous,
and all the saints. Through their prayers, give mercy to Your
people which You possess with your blood for You are the
Lover of Mankind.
Now and ever:
We sing to you, blessed, pure Virgin Theotokos. Through
you the Never-setting Sun shines on those in darkenss and
in the shadow of death’s justice. With all the saints you are
especially the mediatrix of our salvation.
499

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Prayer.
Holy God Who dwells among the saints, You are
acclaimed in heaven by the thrice-holy voice of angels,
praised on earth by Your holy men and women. Through Your
Holy Spirit, You gave grace to each according to the measure
of the gift of Christ, and with that grace You established Your
holy Church, where some are apostles, some prophets, some
evangelizers, some pastors and teachers with their word of
preaching; to You, the same God, [we praise] Who accomplish
all things in all, many became saints, from every generation
to generation who were pleasing to You through their varied
good deeds, and have left us the memory of their heroic good
deeds in which they were offered to You. They are ready to
respond joyfully to help us who are in distress. Remembering
all these saints, and praising their God-pleasing lives, I praise
You Who both inspired their will, and worked to bring about
Your will to accomplish the deeds, and other good deeds, that
I believe were possible because You granted them. Grant that
I, a sinner, may follow their teaching, life, will, faith, longsuffering, and love, and through their prayerful intercession,
Your grace which accomplishes all things in all, to inherit
with them the glory of heaven, and to praise Your most holy
Name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, forever. Amen.
After this: It is truly proper: Trisagion. After Our Father:
Troparion: God of our fathers: and the Theotokion: The
mystery hidden from all ages: see page 491.
And the dismissal.

500

Service of the Resurrection
OF THE SIXTH TONE.
AT GREAT VESPERS.
At O Lord, I have cried: we interpolate ten stichera, and
we sing the appointed stichera of the Resurrection, Tone 6:
Verse: Bring my soul out of this prison and then I shall
praise Your Name.
O Christ, You are victorious over Hades. You ascended the
cross to raise up with Yourself those who sat in the darkness
of death. You alone are free among the dead; from Your own
light, You well up with life, All-powerful Savior, have mercy
on us.
Verse: Around me the just will assemble because of Your
goodness to me.
Today Christ has trampled death! He arose as He foretold,
and bestowed rejoicing upon the world. So let us all sing this,
our hymn: O Wellspring of Life, O Unapproachable Light,
all-powerful Savior, have mercy on us.
501

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Verse: Out of the depths I cry to You, O Lord; Lord, hear
my voice!
Where can we sinners flee from You, O Lord, Who are
present in all creation; to the heavens? – that is where You
dwell; to Hades? – there You trampled death; to the depths of
the sea? – even there is Your hand! We flee to You and, falling
before You, we beg: O Lord, risen from the dead, have mercy
on us.
Additional Anatolian [Eastern] stichera, in the same tone.
Verse: Let Your ears be attentive to the voice of my
pleading.
We exalt in Your cross, O Christ, and we sing the glory
of Your Resurrection. For You are our God, and we have no
other Lord but You.
Verse: If You, O Lord, should mark our guilt, Lord, who
would survive? But with You is found forgiveness: for this we
revere You.
Glory to Your might, O Lord, for You have conquered
the power of death. You have renewed us through Your cross,
granting us life and incorruption.
Verse: My soul is waiting for the Lord. I count on His
word. My soul is longing for the Lord more than watchman
for daybreak.
We forever bless the Lord and praise His resurrection, for
by suffering crucifixion, He has destroyed Death by His death.

502

Service of the Resurrection

Verse: Let the watchman count on daybreak and Israel on
the Lord.
By Your death and burial, O Lord, You broke asunder the
bonds of Hades; and by Your resurrection from the dead, You
enlightened the whole world. We therefore exclaim to You:
Glory to You, O Lord.
Then, the stichera of the saint from the Menaion. Glory:
of the saint if they are available; if they are not, Glory: now
and ever: Theotokion.
Here are other stichera of the Theotokos, composed by
Paul of Amora, in Tone 3:
Verse: Because with the Lord there is mercy and fullness
of redemption, Israel indeed He will redeem from all its
iniquity.
Seeing my physical weakness, spiritual suffering and
heartache, Immaculate Virgin, make me worthy of God’s
deliverance. I beg you save me by your fervent prayers.
Verse: Praise the Lord, all you nations, acclaim Him all
you peoples!
Make me worthy of mercy at the judgment seat of your
Son and God, O Virgin, when He comes.
Verse: Strong is the love of the Lord for us; He is faithful
forever.
Wash away the multitude of all my sins, O Lady, I beg
you. Chop down the rough surges of my passions by the
sword of your prayers. I will sing of your virginal conception
with faith and love.
503

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Who would not extol you, most holy Virgin? Who would
not praise your giving birth without pain? For the onlybegotten Son, Who shines forth from the Father timelessly,
has Himself come forth from you, O pure one. He took flesh
from you in a manner beyond understanding; retaining divine
nature, but assuming human nature for our sake; not divided
into two persons but existing in two natures distinct and
unconfused. O honored and most blessed one, beseech Him to
have mercy on our souls.
The Entrance: O Joyful Light: The Prokeimenon of the
Day: The Lord reigns: and the rest as usual.
At the Aposticha stichera, Tone 6:
O Christ our Savior, the angels in heaven sing the praises
of Your resurrection; make us on earth also worthy to extol
and glorify You with a pure heart.
In Alphabetic order:
Verse: The Lord reigns, He is clothed in majesty.
Almighty God, You destroyed the brazen gates and bars
of Hades, and raised up fallen mankind.Therefore, with one
accord we cry out: O Lord risen from the dead, glory to You.
Verse: For He has made the world firm, not to be moved.
Christ willed to renew us from our corruption of old by
being nailed to a cross and placed in a tomb. When the women
came to anoint his body, they tearfully cried out: O what
504

Service of the Resurrection

sorrow afflicts us! O Savior of all, how could You consent
to rest in a grave? If You truly willed this, why then did You
allow Your body to be stolen? How were You removed? What
place now conceals Your life-bearing body? O Lord, appear
to us as You promised, and put an end to our tears. As they
were lamenting, an angel appeared and cried out to them: Do
not weep, but tell the apostles that the Lord is risen, granting
sanctification and great mercy to the world.
Verse: Holiness befits Your house, O Lord, for the length
of days.
O Christ, You were crucified of Your own free will and by
Your burial, You imprisoned death. As God, You rose in glory
on the third day granting life and great mercy to the world.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Christ the Lord, our Creator and Redeemer, came forth
from your womb, O Virgin most pure. He clothed himself in
our human flesh to set us free from the original curse of Adam.
Therefore, O Mary, we praise you without ceasing as the true
Virgin Theotokos, and we sing with the angels: Rejoice, O
Lady: advocate, protector and salvation of souls.
Then, Now You may dismiss: Trisagion, and after Our
Father: we say the Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 6:
Angelic powers appeared at Your tomb, and the guards
became like dead men. Mary stood at the tomb seeking Your
most pure body. You despoiled Hades without a challenge.
You, the Giver of Life, met the Virgin. O Lord, risen from the
dead, glory to You.
505

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
Christ, Who called you “Mother” and “Blessed One,”
accepted the Passion of His own free will. In His desire to find
the fallen Adam, He caused light to shine forth from His cross
in order to search him out. Then He said to the angels: Rejoice
with me, for I have found the lost piece of silver. Glory to
You, O God, Who accomplished all things in such wisdom.

AT MATINS.
After the Six Psalms: The Lord is God: in Tone 6, and we
say the Troparion: Angelic powers appeared at your tomb:
twice. Glory: now and ever: Christ, Who called you “Mother”
and “Blessed One”: and the usual stichologia of the Psalter.
After the 1st Stichologion, the Sessional Hymn of the
Resurrection, Tone 6:
When the tomb was shown to be open and Hades was
lamenting, Mary cried out to the apostles who were hiding
and said: Come out, laborers of the vineyard, and proclaim the
news of the Resurrection; for the Lord is risen, granting the
world great mercy.
Verse: Arise, O Lord, lift up Your hand. O God, do not
forget the poor.
Mary Magdalene stood by Your tomb and wept, O Lord.
When she thought You were the gardener, she said: Where
have You hidden the eternal Life? Where have You placed
Him Who sits on the throne of the cherubim? When she saw
those guarding Him fearful and appearing as dead, she cried
506

Service of the Resurrection

to them: Give me my Lord or else cry out with me and say:
You have come forth from the tomb, and raised the dead, O
Lord, glory to You!
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, Gideon prefigured your conception, and
David interpreted your birthgiving. As dew descended upon
the fleece so the Word descended into your womb. O holy
Earth, who without seed gave birth to Christ our God, the
salvation of the world, you are full of grace.
After the 2nd Stichologion, the Sessional Hymn of the
Resurrection, Tone 6:
Truly our Life was placed in the grave, and seals were
applied to the stone. The soldiers guarded Christ as they would
a sleeping king. But, striking His enemies with blindness, the
Lord rose.
Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart; I will
recount all Your wonders.
Jonah prefigured Your tomb, O immortal Lord, and Simeon
interpreted Your divine Resurrection; for You descended into
the grave as One Who is dead. You, the Master, shattered
the gates of Hades, and free of corruption, You rose for the
salvation of the world. O Christ our God, You give light to
those in darkness.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
O Virgin and Theotokos, pray to your Son, Christ our
God, Who was willingly nailed upon the cross and rose from
the dead, that He might save our souls.
507

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, The Blameless [The Seventeenth Kathisma] and
the Troparia of the Resurrection: see page 147.
Then, the Hypakoj, Tone 6:
By Your voluntary and life-giving death, O Christ, You
crushed the gates of Hades and opened the paradise of old,
because You are God! Having risen from the dead, You
redeemed our life from corruption.
Then, the Hymns of Ascent, Tone 6:

Antiphon 1:
To the heavens have I lifted up my eyes, O Word of God.
Have mercy on me that I may live in You.
O Word, have mercy on us for we are filled with contempt;
and make us good and chosen vessels.
Glory:
The Holy Spirit is the cause of salvation for all; for when
He breathes on them, He raises them from the cares of this
world. He endows them with wings from on high to carry
them to heaven.
Now and ever: and the same.

Antiphon 2:
Had the Lord not been with us, it would not be possible
for any one of us to stand firm in wrestling with the Enemy;
for only thereby do the victors attain the exaltation of victory.
508

Service of the Resurrection

Woe is me! How shall I escape the Enemy while I am yet
a lover of sin? O Word, deliver not my soul, like a bird, to
their teeth.
Glory:
Through the Holy Spirit all are made divine; and in Him
is joy and understanding and peace and blessedness, for He is
equal together with the Father and the Word.
Now and ever: and the same.

Antiphon 3:
They who trust in the Lord are feared by their enemies,
and are worthy of admiration; for their eyes are fixed on
heaven.
The righteous have secured You as their helper, O Savior,
and therefore they shall not reach out their hands to iniquities.
Glory:
The Holy Spirit has might over all; for all the heavenly
host worship Him, and everything that breathes on earth.
Now and ever: and the same.

Prokeimenon. Tone 6:
O Lord, rouse up Your might! O Lord, come to our help!
Verse: O Shepherd of Israel, hear us; You Who lead
Joseph like a flock.
Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to
the Lord.
Verse: Praise God in his holy place; praise Him in his
mighty heavens.
509

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Gospel of the Resurrection of Matins
according to Luke, Pericope 114.
At that time: Jesus rose from the dead, and standing in
the midst of the disciples, said to them, “Peace be with you.”
But they were startled and terrified and thought that they were
seeing a ghost. Then he said to them, “Why are you troubled?
And why do questions arise in your hearts? Look at my hands
and my feet, that it is I myself. Touch me and see, because a
ghost does not have flesh and bones as you can see I have.” And
as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet. While
they were still incredulous for joy and were amazed, he asked
them, “Have you anything here to eat?” They gave him a piece
of baked fish; he took it and ate it in front of them. He said to
them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was
still with you, that everything written about me in the law of
Moses and in the prophets and psalms must be fulfilled.” Then
he opened their minds to understand the scriptures. And he
said to them, “Thus it is written that the Messiah would suffer
and rise from the dead on the third day and that repentance,
for the forgiveness of sins, would be preached in his name to
all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. You are witnesses
of these things. And [behold] I am sending the promise of
my Father upon you; but stay in the city until you are clothed
with power from on high.” Then he led them [out] as far as
Bethany, raised his hands, and blessed them. As he blessed
them he parted from them and was taken up to heaven. They
did him homage and then returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and they were continually in the temple praising God. Amen.
Then:

510

Service of the Resurrection

Having beheld the resurrection of Christ let us worship the
holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross,
O Christ, and we glorify and praise Your holy Resurrection.
You are our God, and besides You we recognize no other,
and we call upon Your Name. Come, all you faithful, and let
us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ since, through the
cross, joy has come to all the world. Ever praising the Lord,
let us extol His Resurrection since He, having endured the
crucifixion, has destroyed Death by His death.
After the 50th Psalm, Glory:
Through the prayers of the holy apostles, O Merciful One,
cleanse our many sins.
Now and ever:
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Merciful One,
cleanse our many sins.
Then, Tone 6:
[Psalm 50:1]
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your
compassion blot out my offense.
Then:
Jesus is risen from the tomb, as He foretold, and granted
us eternal life and great mercy.
_________________________________________________
If it is the Sunday of the Publican, or the Prodigal, or
Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare, and of the following Sundays
of the Great Fast, instead of Through the prayers of the holy
apostles: Glory: Tone 8:
511

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Open to me the doors of repentance, O Giver of Life. For
my spirit rises early in the morning bearing the temple of my
body all defiled. But as You are compassionate, purify it by
the goodness of Your mercies.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Lead me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos, for I
have condemned myself with shameful sins and have wasted
all my life in slothfulness. Through your prayers deliver me
from all sinfulness.
Then, Tone 6:
[Psalm 50:1]
Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your
compassion blot out my offense.
After this:
When I think upon the multitude of my evil deeds, I
tremble for the terrible Day of Judgment. But trusting in the
compassion of Your mercy, O Lord, I cry to You like David:
“Have mercy on me, O God, according to Your great mercy.”
_________________________________________________

CANON OF THE RESURRECTION.
Tone 6. Ode 1.
Irmos. When the Israelites crossed the abyss as if on dry
land, and saw Pharoah their persecutor drowning in the sea,
they cried out: Let us sing a hymn of victory to our God.
Versicle: Glory to Your holy Resurrection, O Lord.
512

Service of the Resurrection

When You stretched out Your hands on the cross, O God
of goodness, You fulfilled the good will of Your Father. With
one voice we now sing a hymn of victory to You.
At Your order, O Master of life, death approached You as
a servant who is filled with fear; and through death You have
granted us resurrection and eternal life.
Glory:
He stands before Pilate’s judgment seat as He wished.
The Judge is judged; can the trial be lawful? God is slapped
across the face by iniquity’s hand. Creatures of earth and
heaven tremble.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Your Creator desired to become incarnate in your virginal
womb. Incomprehensibly you conceived Him, and you have
become the Lady of creation.

Ode 3.
Irmos. None is as holy as You, O Lord my God; You have
exalted the strength of Your faithful, O Good One, and You
have established us on the unshakeable rock of the confession
of Your Name.
When creation saw God crucified in the flesh, it trembled
with fear; but it was held together by the hand of the One Who
let Himself be crucified for us.
The power of Death has been crushed by death and now
lives without strength; for it could not bear the divine invasion
of Life, and resurrection is granted to the whole world.
513

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Glory:
Glory to Your Resurrection, Savior! You saved us from
death’s decay and from hell. You are almighty! We sing our
song: No one is holy but You, Lord, and You love us!
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You have surpassed the powers of every creature, pure
Lady, by the miracle of your holy conception. You conceived
God in your womb supernaturally, while remaining a virgin,
you gave Him birth.

Ode 4.
Irmos. Christ is my strength, my Lord and my God!
This is the hymn that the holy Church proclaims, and with a
purified heart she sings praises unto the Lord.
The wood of the true life flourished, O Christ, when Your
cross was planted in the ground. Sprinkled with blood and
water from Your pure side, it made life spring up for us.
Never again shall the serpent deceive me by offering me
the chance to become like God, for Christ, my divine Creator,
has opened the path of life for me once again.
Glory:
You died for us, Savior. They laid You in a tomb, but it
could not hold You! You rose as God to save our souls.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Truly unfathomable and incomprehensible are the
514

Service of the Resurrection

mysteries of Your sacred conception, O perfect Virgin. They
awe the creatures of heaven and earth.

Ode 5.
Irmos. O God most good, illumine with Your divine
brightness the souls of those who love You and who keep
watch before You. I beseech You, O Word of God: grant that
they may know You, the true God, Who calls us out of the
darkness of sin.
The cherubim have drawn back from me, O Lord, and
the flaming sword no longer guards Eden; for they have seen
You, O Word of God and true God, open the way to paradise
for the good thief.
I no longer fear returning to the earth, O Christ my Lord;
for in Your great compassion, when I was still abandoned,
You brought me forth from the earth to the height of eternal
life by Your Resurrection.
Glory:
The authority of death was destroyed in Your death,
blessed Lord. You flowed forth a fountain of life for us. You
gave us immortality. We honor Your burial and resurrection
through which You enlightened the world as God.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Gracious Lady of the world, save those who sincerely
confess that you are the Theotokos. We have you as an
invincible armor, O Theotokos.

515

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Ode 6.
Irmos. When I see the ocean of this life tossed about by
the tempest of temptations, I hasten to Your harbor of peace
and cry out to You, O God of goodness: Rescue my life from
the pit of corruption.
When You were nailed to the cross, O Lord, You wiped
out the ancient curse; and when the lance pierced Your side,
You tore up the debt against Adam and set the whole world
free.
Deceived by the Serpent, Adam was hurled into the pit of
Hades; but You, O God of compassion, have gone in search of
him, and carrying him upon Your shoulders, You have raised
him with You.
Glory:
You were caught in the tomb but not held, Savior. If You
willingly tasted death, still You rose as immortal God. At the
same time You raised the prisoners of death, and turned the
grief of the women to joy.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Most pure Lady you gave birth to the Lord as food
for man. Calm down the evil surges and movement of my
passions. Give peace and quiet to my heart.

Kontakion, Tone 6:
Christ our God, the Life-giver, with His life-giving hand
raised the dead from the valley of death, granting resurrection
to us all. He is the Savior of All, the Resurrection, the Life,
and the God of all.
516

Service of the Resurrection

Ikos:
O Source of Life, we the faithful, praise and bow before
Your cross and Your tomb; for You have chained Hades, O
immortal Lord, and as the almighty God, You have raised
the dead with You. You shattered the gates of Hades and
destroyed the dominion of Death. We mortals now praise You
with love, for You have risen and demolished the power of the
deadly enemy. You have raised all those who believe in You,
and You delivered the world from the arrows of the Serpent.
O all-powerful One, You have freed us from the deceits of the
Enemy. Therefore, in faith we praise Your Resurrection, by
which You saved us, O God of the universe.

Ode 7.
Irmos. In the furnace the angel poured out dew upon
the noble youths but at the order of God the fire burned the
Chaldeans; and the tyrant was forced to sing: Blessed are You,
O Lord, the God of our fathers.
Lamenting over Your passion, in full daylight the sun
was covered with darkness, and light was darkened over all
creation as it cried out: Blessed are You, O Lord, God of our
fathers.
At Your descent, O Christ, the lower kingdoms were
filled with light, and our first father was seen filled with joy;
dancing and rejoicing, he cried out: Blessed are You, O Lord,
God of our fathers.
Glory:
In regard to the mystic type, He Who once delivered
517

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Israel from Pharoah allows Himself to be crucified by Israel.
He undoes the bonds of sin. We sing to Him: Blessed are You,
God the Savior.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
Light bursts upon the whole world from you, Virgin
Mother. You gave birth to God, the creator of everything. Ask
Him to give abundant mercy to his faithful people, O pure
Lady.

Ode 8.
Irmos. You made dew spring forth amid the flames for
Your holy ones, and through water You set fire to the sacrifice
of Your just one, for You accomplish all things through Your
will alone. O Christ, we exalt You through all ages.
The people who formerly killed the prophets have now
been seized with envy and have crucified the Word of God,
Whom we exalt through the ages.
Without leaving the vaults of heaven, You descended
into Hades, O Christ, and raised with You humanity who had
been lying in the corruption of the grave, and who exalts You
through all ages.
Glory:
All who hear are astounded! The One from on high has
come to earth by His own will. He vanquished hell’s might by
His cross and burial. He raised everyone up to sing: Children,
bless Him! Priests, sing to Him! People, praise Him, forever!

518

Service of the Resurrection

Now and ever: Theotokion:
Out of light from the Light-giver you conceived the Word.
How mysteriously you gave birth to Him! You were glorified,
obedient Maiden, for the Spirit of God abode in you. Now we
join in chorus to praise you forever.
Then we sing More honorable than the cherubim:

Ode 9.
Irmos. It is impossible for man to see God upon Whom
even the orders of angels dare not gaze; but through you, O
most pure, the Incarnate Word revealed Himself to mankind.
Therefore exalting Him together with the heavenly hosts, we
call you blessed.
You remained a stranger to passions, O Word of God,
even though You lived our human condition in the flesh; but
You delivered humanity from its passions, having overcome
our passions by Your own passion, O our Savior. For You
alone are beyond all suffering and are almighty.
Descending into the abyss of death, You preserved Your
body from the corruption of the tomb; and Your soul was not
left in Hades, O Giver of life, but You were raised up as from
sleep, O Lord, raising us with You.
Glory:
All of us praise God the Father, the co-eternal Son, and we
venerate the unfathomable and glorious power of the All-Holy
Spirit. You are the One, Almighty, and Undivided Trinity.
519

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Theotokion:
By your unutterably mysterious and inexpressible
conception, most pure Theotokos, resurrection has been
granted to the world. Life was robed in flesh from you. It
shone for all! It crushed the threat of death!
After this The Exapostilarion from Matins,
Tone 6:
After Your resurrection from the grave, O Savior, You
revealed Your human nature as You stood in the midst of Your
disciples; You were with them and taught them the baptism of
repentance. Then You ascended to Your Father and promised
to send them the Paraclete. Therefore, O Lover of Mankind
and God most high, glory to Your holy resurrection!
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion:
The Author of all creation and the God of all took a carnal
body from your pure womb, O holy Virgin. He renewed our
nature which had been corrupt, preserving your virginity after
birthgiving as you were before. Therefore, we all praise you
in faith and exclaim: Rejoice, O Queen of the whole world.
At The Praises the Stichera of the Resurrection, Tone 6:
Verse: To carry out the sentence pre-ordained: this honor
is for all His faithful.
Your cross, O Lord, is life and resurrection to Your people
and we place our hope in it. We praise You, our God, risen
from the dead. Have mercy on us!
Verse: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His
mighty heavens.
520

Service of the Resurrection

Your grave, O Master, has opened Paradise to the human
race. Freed from corruption, we praise You, our God, risen
from the dead. Have mercy on us.
Verse: Praise Him for his powerful deeds, praise His
surpassing goodness.
Let us praise Christ, risen from the dead, together with the
Father and the Spirit, and let us cry out to Him: You are our
life and resurrection; have mercy on us.
Verse: O praise Him with sound of trumpet; praise Him
with lute and harp.
You rose from the grave on the third day, O Christ,
according to the Scriptures. You raised up our first father
along with You; the human race, therefore, glorifies You and
sings the praises of Your resurrection.
Other Anatolian [Eastern] stichera, in the same tone.
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him
with strings and pipes.
Great and awesome is the mystery of Your holy
Resurrection, O Lord; for You came forth from the tomb like
a Bridegroom from His chamber, destroying Death in order
to free Adam. Therefore, the angels rejoice in heaven, and on
earth we glorify Your compassion for us, O Lover of Mankind.
Verse: O praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise
Him with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and
that breathes give praise to the Lord.
O Pharisees and transgressors of the Law, where are the
seals and the silver which you gave to the soldiers? In truth the
Treasure has not been stolen but has risen, for He is almighty.
521

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Blush with shame, therefore, O deniers of Christ. The Lord of
glory suffered, was buried and rose from the dead. He is the
Lord Whom we worship.
Verse: Arise, O Lord, lift up Your hand! O God, do not
forget the poor!
How were you robbed of the buried One when the tomb
was sealed, after having placed guards and seals on it?
Behold, the King came out even though the doors were closed.
Therefore, either show us His body or worship Him with us as
God and sing: Glory to Your cross and Resurrection, O Lord!
Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart; I will
recount Your wonders.
The myrrh-bearing women came to Your life-giving
grave, O Lord, weeping and carrying ointments. They sought
Your most pure body to anoint it. Then they saw an angel
wrapped with light and sitting on a stone. He spoke to them,
saying: Why are you shedding tears for the One from Whose
side life overflowed to the world? Why do you seek in the
grave One Who is deathless? Hasten instead to His disciples
to proclaim with joy His glorious Resurrection. O Savior, You
give joy to the whole world by Your Resurrection; enlighten
us also and grant us forgiveness and great mercy.
Glory: The Gospel sticheron, Tone 6:
Since You are the true peace of God for us, O Christ, You
gave Your peace to Your disciples after Your Resurrection.
They were frightened when they thought that they were
beholding a spirit. But You removed the anxiety of their hearts
when You showed them Your hands and feet, yet they were
still in doubt. But when You took food with them, reminding
522

Service of the Resurrection

them of Your preaching, You opened their minds to understand
the Scriptures. You made the eternal covenant with them; You
blessed them and rose, ascending into heaven. Therefore, with
them, we worship You; O Lord, glory to You!
Now and ever: Theotokion:
You are most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos. Through the
One Who was incarnate of you, Hades is made captive, Adam
is restored; the curse is destroyed; Eve is freed; Death put to
death, and we have been made alive. Therefore, we cry out in
praise: Blessed are You, O Christ, our God, Who so willed.
Glory to You.
The Great Doxology. After that the Troparion of the
Resurrection, and on the first, third, fifth, and seventh tones,
we say this:
Today salvation has come to the world. Let us sing to Him
Who is risen from the tomb, the Source of our life, Who has
crushed Death by death, and bestowed on us victory and great
mercy.
On the 2nd, 4th, 6th, and 8th tones, we say this:
Rising from the tomb and breaking the bonds of Hades,
O Lord, You abolished the sentence of Death, delivering all
from the snares of the enemy. Then You revealed Yourself to
Your apostles and sent them forth to preach, and through them
You have granted Your peace to the whole world, You Who
alone are most merciful.

523

524

Troparia, Theotokia
and Kontakia
during the Year

525

526

Troparia and Kontakia of the Resurrection
of the Eight Tones, with their Theotokia and Hypakoj,
Prokeimena and Kontakia

TONE ONE
Troparion
The stone was sealed by the Jews, soldiers guarded Your
most pure body, but You, O Savior, arose on the third day
granting life to the world. Therefore, the heavenly powers
acclaimed You, O Giver of Life: Glory to Your resurrection,
O Christ! Glory to Your Kingdom! Glory to Your salvation!
You alone love mankind.
Theotokion
O holy Tabernacle, Gabriel cried out to you: Rejoice,
O Virgin, full of grace: the Lord of All became incarnate of
you, as the righteous David had foretold. In bearing your
Creator, you have shown yourself to surpass the vastness of
the heavens. We therefore cry out: Glory to Him Who dwelt in
you! Glory to Him Who came forth from you. Glory to Him
Who has set us free through your life-giving birth.
Hypakoj
The repentance of the good thief opened paradise to him,
527

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

and the tears of the myrrh-bearing women proclaimed the
joyful news: O Christ as God You are risen, granting great
mercy to the world.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 12:
I Myself will arise, says the Lord. I will grant them the
salvation for which they thirst.
Verse: The words of the Lord are words without alloy.
Kontakion
According to: When You will come:
(Jehda prijdesi:
)
As God, You arose in glory from the grave and raised the
world with You. Human nature praises You as God and Death
has vanished. Adam sings in exaltation, O Lord; Eve, freed
from bondage, cries joyfully: O Christ, it is You Who give
resurrection to all.

TONE TWO
Troparion
When You descended to death, O Immortal Life, You
destroyed Hades by the brilliance of Your divinity; and when
You raised the dead from the depths of the earth, all the
heavenly powers cried out: O Giver of Life, Christ our God,
glory to You.
Theotokion
O Theotokos, the mysteries surrounding you are
exceedingly glorious, and beyond the power of understanding.
For you retained the seal of purity, and your virginity remained
528

Troparia and Kontakia of the Resurrection

inviolate; yet you are acknowledged, without doubt, to be the
Mother who gave birth to the true God. We beg you, therefore,
to entreat Him to save our souls.
Hypakoj
The women went to the tomb after Your passion to anoint
Your body, O Christ our God. They saw the angels and were
astonished; for they heard them crying with a loud voice: The
Lord is risen and grants great mercy to the world.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 7:
Lord, rise up in Your anger, rise against the fury of
my foes. My God, awake! You will give judgment. Let the
company of nations gather round You.
Verse: Lord God, I take refuge in You. From my pursuers
save me and rescue me.
Kontakion
You arose from the grave, Almighty Savior. Seeing
the miracle, Hades was struck with fear; the dead arose. At
this sight, all creation rejoices with You; Adam joins with
exultation; and the world, O my Savior, sings Your praises
forever.

TONE THREE
Troparion
Let the heavens rejoice, let the earth be glad; for the Lord
has shown the might of His arm. By His death the Lord has
trampled Death; He has become the first-born of the dead; He
has delivered us from the depths of Hades and has granted
great mercy to the world.
529

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Theotokion
We sing your praises, O Virgin; for as the Theotokos, you
always intercede for the salvation of the human race. It is from
you that our God and your Son took flesh. Then, by suffering
the Passion on the cross, He delivered us from corruption as
the Lover of Mankind.
Hypakoj
The brilliant angel startled the myrrh-bearing women and
said: Why do you seek the Living One in the grave? He is
truly risen and has emptied the tombs. Know, therefore, that
the Changeless One changed corruption to incorruption. Say
to Him: How dreadful are Your works, O Lord, for by Your
death You have saved the human race.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 95:
Proclaim to the nations: God is King. The world He made
firm, not to be moved.
Verse: O sing a new song to the Lord; sing to the Lord,
all the earth.
Kontakion
According to: Today the Virgin:
(D’iva dnes’:  
)
Today, You arose from the grave, O merciful Lord; You
led us out of the gates of Death. Today, Adam exalts and Eve
rejoices. With them, the prophets and patriarchs ever praise
the might of Your divine power.

530

Troparia and Kontakia of the Resurrection

TONE FOUR
Troparion
The joyful message of the resurrection was heard by
the women disciples from the angel, and being freed from
the ancestral curse, they boasted to the apostles: Death is
despoiled; Christ our God is risen, giving great mercy to the
world.
Theotokion
The mystery hidden from all ages and unknown to the
angels has been made known to those on earth through you, O
Theotokos. God has taken flesh in a union without confusion,
and willingly accepted the cross for us; whereby He raised the
first formed Adam and saved our souls from death.
Hypakoj
The myrrh-bearing women hastened to the apostles and
related to them the account of Your Resurrection, O Christ,
saying: You rose because You are God, and You grant great
mercy to the world.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 43:
Stand up and come to our help! Redeem us because of
Your love!
Verse: We heard with our own ears, O God; our fathers
have told us the story of the things You did in days long ago.
Kontakion
According to: You have revealed Yourself:
(Javilsja jesi dnes’:   
)
O my Savior and Redeemer, as God, You raised from the
grave all those who were in chains and destroyed the gates of
Hades; and, as Lord, You arose on the third day.
531

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

TONE FIVE
Troparion
O faithful, let us praise and adore the Word eternal with the
Father and the Spirit, and born of the Virgin for our salvation.
For He chose to ascend the cross in the flesh and to suffer
death, and to raise the dead by His glorious resurrection.
Theotokion
Rejoice, Virgin, impassible Gateway of the Lord! Rejoice,
protective Wall of those who take refuge in you! Rejoice,
peaceful Haven untroubled by storms! Rejoice, O Virgin who
has not known wedlock, and yet has given birth in the flesh to
your Creator and God! O Theotokos, never cease to intercede
for all those who praise and worship your Son.
Hypakoj
The minds of the myrrh-bearing women were dazzled
by the angelic vision, and their souls were illumined by the
divine Resurrection. Therefore, they spoke to the apostles,
saying: Declare to the nations the Resurrection of the Lord
Who works His wonders with us and bestows on us great
mercy.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 9:
Arise, then, Lord! My God, lift up Your hand! The Lord
is King forever!
Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart; I will
recall all Your wonders.

532

Troparia and Kontakia of the Resurrection

Kontakion
According to: Let us the faithful:
(Sobeznačal’noje Slovo:  

)

O Savior, You descended into Hades. You crushed its
gates as the Almighty. You raised the dead and destroyed the
sting of Death as the Creator. You delivered Adam from the
curse, O Lover of Mankind; therefore, all cry out to You, O
Lord, save us.

TONE SIX
Troparion
Angelic powers appeared at Your tomb, and the guards
became like dead men. Mary stood at the tomb seeking Your
most pure body. You despoiled Hades without a challenge.
You, the Giver of Life, met the Virgin. O Lord, risen from the
dead, glory to You.
Theotokion
Christ, Who called you “Mother” and “Blessed One,”
accepted the Passion of His own free will. In His desire to find
the fallen Adam, He caused light to shine forth from His cross
in order to search him out. Then He said to the angels: Rejoice
with me, for I have found the lost piece of silver. Glory to
You, O God, Who accomplished all things in such wisdom.
Hypakoj
By Your voluntary and life-giving death, O Christ,
You crushed the gates of Hades and opened the paradise of
old, because You are God! Having risen from the dead You
redeemed our life from corruption.
533

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 79:
O Lord, rouse up Your might! O Lord, come to our help!
Verse: O Shepherd of Israel, hear us; You Who lead
Joseph like a flock.
Kontakion
Christ our God, the Life-giver, with His life-giving hand
raised the dead from the valley of death, granting resurrection
to all of us. He is the Savior of All, the Resurrection, the Life,
and the God of All.

TONE SEVEN
Troparion
You have destroyed Death by Your cross; You opened
paradise to the thief. The sorrow of the myrrh-bearers You
turned to joy. You commanded Your apostles to proclaim;
Christ our God, You have risen, granting great mercy to the
world.
Theotokion
O Theotokos, we sing your praises, for you were a virgin
before conceiving, and remained a virgin after giving birth.
And since you have given birth to our Salvation, Jesus Christ,
you have become a treasury of assistance for all who seek
resurrection and eternal life. Therefore, lift us up from the
depths of our transgressions, for we place our hope in you.

534

Troparia and Kontakia of the Resurrection

Hypakoj
You have taken our image and likeness and endured
crucifixion in the flesh; save me by Your resurrection, O Christ
our God, for You are the Lover of Mankind.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 9:
Arise, then, Lord my God, lift up Your hand. O God, do
not forget the poor!
Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart; I will
recount all Your wonders.
Kontakion
No longer can the might of Death rule over us; Christ
descended, destroying and crushing its power. Hades remains
enchained. The prophets rejoice together. The Savior has
appeared, saying to those in darkness: Come forth, faithful, to
the Resurrection.

TONE EIGHT
Troparion
You descended from on high, O merciful One. You
accepted burial for three days to free us from our passions. O
Lord, our Resurrection and our Life, glory to You.
Theotokion
O gracious Lord, for the sake of mankind You were born
of a virgin; through Your death on the cross You conquered
Death; and through Your resurrection You revealed Yourself
as God. O Merciful Lord, do not disdain those whom You
have created with Your own hands, but show forth Your love
535

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

for mankind. Accept the intercession which the Mother who
bore You makes in our behalf: O Savior, save Your despairing
people.
Hypakoj
The myrrh-bearing women came to the tomb of the Giver
of Life, seeking among the dead the Lord, Who is deathless.
When they received the Good News from the angels, they
preached to the apostles that the Lord is risen, granting great
mercy to the world.
At the Matins Prokeimenon, Psalm 145:
The Lord will reign forever; Zion’s God from age to age.
Verse: My soul, give praise to the Lord! I will praise my
God all my days.
Kontakion
According to: To You, O Lord, the Gardener:
(Jako načatki:  
)
Rising from the grave, You raised the dead. You lifted
up Adam, and Eve rejoices in Your resurrection. The whole
world celebrates Your resurrection from the dead, O Most
Merciful One.

536

Troparia and Kontakia of the
Days of the Week
SUNDAY EVENING [MONDAY]
[Dedicated to the Holy Angels]
Troparion, Tone 4:
Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us by your prayers and to
shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: Deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.

537

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

MONDAY EVENING [TUESDAY]
[Dedicated to the Holy Prophet, Forerunner,
and Baptist John]
Troparion, Tone 2:
The memory of the righteous is celebrated with praise,
but for you, O Forerunner, the Lord’s testimony is enough.
You were shown to be more honorable than the prophets since
you were deemed worthy to baptize in the waters the Lord you
had proclaimed. Therefore, you fought for the truth, and with
joy proclaimed the good news to those in Hades, that God has
appeared in the flesh to take away the sins of the world and to
grant us great mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today she who once was barren gives birth to Christ’s
Forerunner. He himself is the fulfillment of all prophecy; for
in the Jordan, he imposed his hand upon the Word of God
Whom the prophets had foretold and was shown to be his
prophet, herald, and Forerunner.

TUESDAY EVENING [WEDNESDAY]
[Dedicated to the Precious, Holy, and Life-Creating Cross
and to the Most Holy Theotokos]
Troparion of the cross, Tone 1:
Save Your people, O Lord, and bless your inheritance.
Grant victory to your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
538

Troparia and Kontakia of the Days of the Week

Kontakion of the cross, Tone 4
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.

WEDNESDAY EVENING [THURSDAY]
[Dedicated to the Holy Apostles
and to Our Holy Father Nicholas of Myra]
Troparion of the Apostles, Tone 3:
O holy apostles, intercede with the merciful God that He
may grant our souls forgiveness of sins.
Another, Troparion to St. Nicholas, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and archbishop Nicholas, intercede with
Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion of the Apostles, Tone 2:
Lord, You have received Your steadfast and inspired
preachers, the foremost of Your apostles, into the enjoyment
of Your good gifts and repose. You preferred their sufferings
and death above any sacrifice. For You alone know the secrets
of the heart.

539

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Another Kontakion to St. Nicholas, Tone 3:
You were renowned as a priest in Myra, O holy Nicholas;
for you fulfilled the Gospel of Christ, O venerable father. You
risked your life for your people and saved the innocent from
death. Thereby you have been initiated into the mysteries of
the grace of God.

THURSDAY EVENING [FRIDAY]

[Dedicated to the Precious, Holy, and Life-Creating Cross]
Troparion of the cross, Tone 1:
Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.
Grant victory to your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Kontakion of the cross, Tone 4:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.

FRIDAY EVENING [SATURDAY]

[Dedicated to All Saints and to the Faithful Departed]
Troparion of the Saints, Tone 2:
Apostles, martyrs, and prophets, bishops, venerable and
righteous saints, you have finished the course and have kept
the faith. Since you can approach the Savior with confidence,
we ask you to beseech His goodness on our behalf, for the
salvation of our souls.
540

Troparia and Kontakia of the Days of the Week

A Second Troparion, for the Departed, Tone 2:
O Lord, in Your goodness, remember Your servants and
forgive whatever sins they committed in their life; for no one
is sinless but You alone. You have the power to grant rest to
the departed.

SATURDAY, We say:
Glory:
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants, where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
Now and ever: Tone 8
To You, O Lord, Gardener of all Creation, the world
offers the God-bearing martyrs as the first fruits of nature.
Through their prayers and through the Theotokos, preserve
Your Church, Your dwelling-place, in perfect peace, O most
merciful One.

541

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

542

Theotokia and Stavrotheotokia
of the Eight Tones

said on Sunday evening Vespers
and on Tuesday and Thursday evening Vespers
according to the Tone of the Troparia
of the Saints
Sunday evening Vespers: Theotokion, Tone 1:
The universe recognizes in you, O Woman full of grace,
the marvel of marvels and it rejoices. You have borne without
human seed the One Whom even the highest ranks of angels
cannot look upon, and you have given birth in a manner
beyond understanding. Intercede with Him for the salvation
of our souls.
Tuesday and Thursday evening Vespers:
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 1:
O Pure One, we have obtained your protection. Through
your intercession, we have been kept from harm and
surrounded at all times with the grace of your Son’s cross.
Therefore, we exalt you with great devotion.

543

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Theotokion, Tone 2:
Most Merciful Theotokos, fount of mercy; deem us worthy
of compassion. Look upon a sinful people and as always show
your power; for placing our trust in you, we cry out to you
“Rejoice,” as once did Gabriel, the commander of angels.
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 2:
O Virgin and all-glorious Theotokos, we sing to you
a hymn of praise, for Hades has been destroyed by your
Son’s cross; Death has been put to death, and we, the dead,
have been made to rise and become worthy of life. We have
obtained paradise, the original bliss. Therefore, we glorify you
by giving thanks to Christ our God, for He alone is almighty
and all-merciful.
Theotokion, Tone 3:
Gabriel was rapt in amazement as he beheld your virginity
and the splendor of your purity, O Theotokos, and he cried out
to you: By what name shall I call you? I am bewildered, I am
lost! I shall greet you as I was commanded to do: Rejoice, O
Woman full of grace!
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 3:
O Theotokos, we have obtained your Son’s cross as a
staff of power with which to strike down the boastings of the
Enemy. Therefore we exalt you without ceasing.
Theotokion, Tone 4:
To the one who was reared in the Temple, close to the
Holy of Holies, and who was full of faith, wisdom, and perfect
virginity, Gabriel, the captain and leader, offered esteem and
544

Theotokia and Stavrotheotokia of the Eight Tones

greetings from heaven when he said: Rejoice, O Blessed One!
Rejoice, O Glorified One! The Lord is with you!
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 4:
O Virgin, All-Immaculate Mother of Christ God, a sword
pierced your holy soul when you saw your Son and God
willingly crucified. Therefore, O Blessed One, never cease to
pray to Him that he may grant us forgiveness of our sins.
Theotokion, Tone 5:
With the angels of heaven and with people on earth, O
Theotokos, we cry out to you exultingly: Rejoice, O gate that
is wider than heaven! Rejoice, only salvation of the human
race! Rejoice, O honorable one, full of grace, who gave birth
to the incarnate God!
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 5:
Since you are all-pleasing to God, may the error of idol
worship be destroyed, and may the power of demons be
trodden underfoot by the might of your Son’s cross. Therefore,
we, the faithful, always sing to you in humility; we bless you
and we exalt you, professing that you are truly the Theotokos.
Theotokion, Tone 6:
The announcement of Gabriel to the Virgin was the
beginning of salvation, for she heard the salutation and did
not flee from the greeting, nor did she doubt as did Sarah in
the tent. She proclaimed, instead: Behold the handmaid of the
Lord. Be it done to me according to your word.

545

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Stavrotheotokion, Tone 6:
O Virgin Theotokos, pray to your Son, Christ our God,
Who delivered the world from error, when He accepted
willingly to be crucified, that He may have mercy on our souls.
Theotokion, Tone 7:
Undefiled Virgin Theotokos, pray to your Son with the
powers of heaven that before death, He may grant forgiveness
of sins to those who faithfully glorify Him.
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 7:
O Virgin Theotokos, intercede with Christ our God Who
was crucified for us and destroyed the power of Death, that He
may save our souls.
Theotokion, Tone 8:
Rejoice, O Woman who at the angel’s greeting, contained
the joy of the world! Rejoice, for you gave birth to your
Creator and Lord! Rejoice, for you were made worthy to
become the Theotokos!
Stavrotheotokion, Tone 8:
Seeing the Lamb and Shepherd and Savior of the world
on the cross, she who bore Him said weeping: The world
rejoices, for it receives redemption; but my inner being burns
as I see Your crucifixion which You endured for all, O my Son
and my God.

546

Troparia and Kontakia of the
Classes of Saints
Troparion to the Theotokos, Tone 4:
Let us humble sinners now flee with fervor to the
Theotokos. Let us prostrate in repentance and cry out from
the depths of our souls: O Lady, help us and have mercy on us.
Hurry to assist us for we are perishing because of our many
sins. Do not turn us away empty handed. For you alone we
have as our protectress.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
We have no other help and no other hope but you, most
pure Virgin. You are our help; in you we hope and we praise
you. We are your servants; do not let us be put to shame.
Troparion to the Bodiless Ones, Tone 4:
Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us by your prayers and to
shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: Deliver us from
danger. For you are the commanders of the powers on high.

547

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.
Troparion to a Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory of your prophet (Name), O
Lord, we implore You to save our souls through his prayers.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Your pure heart was enlightened by the Spirit and became
a vessel of radiant prophecy. Because you saw as present the
events yet to come we honor you, O blessed and glorious
prophet (Name).
Troparion to an Apostle, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle (Name), intercede with the merciful God
that He may grant our souls forgiveness of sins.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
O Apostle (Name), the Church has gained you for all time
as a brilliant star, enlightening it with the multitude of your
miracles. Therefore, we cry out to Christ: O most merciful
Lord, save those who in faith honor the memory of Your
Apostle.
Troparion to two or more Apostles, Tone 3:
O holy apostles, intercede with the merciful God that He
may grant our souls forgiveness of sins.
548

Troparia and Kontakia of the Classes of Saints

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Wise apostles of the Lord, you became branches of the
vine of Christ, bearing clusters of virtues and pouring out the
wine of salvation for us. Partaking of it, we are filled with
joy. As we celebrate your glorious memory, pray that we be
granted great mercy and forgiveness of sins.
Troparion to a Hierarch, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and bishop (Name), intercede with Christ
our God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Divine thunder, spiritual trumpet, sower of faith, and
destroyer of heresies, servant of the Trinity, O great bishop
(Name), you stand forever with the angels. Pray without
ceasing for all of us.
Troparion to two or more Hierarchs, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
The Church glorifies you in song as teachers of virtue
and the splendor of hierarchs. By your prayers, grant growth
in virtue and deliverance from the snares of evil for you are
invincible.
549

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Troparion to a Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
(Name), your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You armed yourself in a godly way with purity of soul, and
you wielded unceasing prayer as a mighty spear, piercing the
armies of demons. Our father (Name), pray without ceasing
for all of us.
Troparion to several Venerable Men, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Passing through the stormy waves, you remained dry. You
drowned the bodiless enemies in the mighty streams of your
tears. O venerable fathers, filled with God’s wisdom, you have
received the gift of miracles. Pray without ceasing for all of
us.
Troparion to a Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr (Name), O Lord our God, in his struggle
received an incorruptible crown from You. With Your
strength, he brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly
valor of demons. Through his prayers, O Christ our God, save
our souls.
550

Troparia and Kontakia of the Classes of Saints

Kontakion, Tone 2:
O victorious martyr (Name), you arose as a bright star not
misleading the world but announcing Christ the Sun by your
rays. You have extinguished all error. Give us light as you
pray without ceasing for all of us.
Troparion to two or more Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God, in their struggles received
incorruptible crowns from You. With Your strength, they
brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly valor of
demons. Through their prayers, O Christ our God, save our
souls.
or this Troparion, Tone 1:
O Lover of Mankind, accept the sufferings which Your
saints endured for You. As we pray, heal all our pains.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You appeared as bright lamps, O godly martyrs. You
enlightened all creation with the brilliance of your miracles.
As you free us from sickness and drive away forever the
depths of darkness, pray without ceasing to Christ our God
for all of us.
Troparion to a Priest-martyr, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life and succeeded to
their throne, divinely inspired bishop. You found access to
contemplation in the active life. Therefore, you rightly taught
the word of truth and struggled for the faith to the shedding of
your blood. O Priest-martyr (Name), pray to Christ our God
to save our souls.
551

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 4:
You lived piously as a bishop, and followed the path to
martyrdom. Filled with divine wisdom, you put out the fire of
sacrifice to idols. You were a defender of your flock. Therefore,
to honor you we mystically sing: Our father (Name), by your
prayers, deliver us always from tribulation.
Troparion to several Priest-martyrs, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today we gather to praise in hymns the never-setting lights
of the Sun of Reason shining upon those in the darkness of
ignorance, calling them all to the summit of virtue. Therefore,
O Priest-martyrs, we cry out to you: Rejoice, foundation of
all ascetics.
Troparion to a Venerable Martyr, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
(Name), your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
As a venerable and proven ascetic, as an honorable and
renowned martyr, a model of the desert life, O ever-exalted
(Name), we sing worthy hymns of praise to you, for you have
trampled serpents.
552

Troparia and Kontakia of the Classes of Saints

Troparion to several Venerable Martyrs, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Passing through the stormy waves, you remained dry. You
drowned the bodiless enemies in the mighty streams of your
tears. O venerable martyrs filled with God’s wisdom, you
have received the gift of miracles. Pray without ceasing for
all of us.
Troparion to a Woman Martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb (Name), O Jesus, cries out in a loud voice: I
love You, my Bridegroom; I seek You with painful longing; I
am crucified with You; in Your baptism, I am buried with You;
I suffer for You that I may reign with You; and I die for You
that I may live with You. Receive me as a spotless sacrifice
immolated with love for You. By her prayers, O merciful One,
save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
All the faithful find spiritual healing in your all-holy
temple, O renowned virgin-martyr (Name), with a loud voice
we sing to you: Pray without ceasing to Christ our God for all
of us.

553

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Troparion to a Venerable Woman-martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb: Refer to page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Your godly memory, O (Name), has risen upon the
world like the sun and tells of your life; for by self-denial
you destroyed the passions of the flesh, and by the blood of
martyrdom you wedded yourself to Christ. Therefore, deliver
from every evil those who praise you that we may cry out to
you: Rejoice, O venerable mother.
Troparion to several Woman-martyrs, Tone 1:
You finished the race and kept the faith. By martyrdom
you were led to Christ the Lamb and Shepherd, O rational
lambs. Therefore, today, with a joyful heart, O most wondrous
women, extolling Christ, we celebrate your holy memory.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
We celebrate the memory of the martyrs of Christ, and
in faith we pray for help that all be delivered from every
affliction. We cry out: Our God is with us and has glorified
these women in His good will.
Troparion to a Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
(Name), your soul rejoices with the angels.

554

Troparia and Kontakia of the Classes of Saints

Kontakion, Tone 2:
In your love for the Lord you disdained the desire for rest,
O venerable woman. You enlightened your soul by fasting and
with power you conquered beasts; but by your prayers destroy
the pride of our enemies.
Troparion to several Venerable Women, Tone 2:
With sincere desire you wedded yourselves to Christ and
rejected worldly marriage, O glorious women. You matured in
the struggle for virtues and rose to the summit of incorruption.
Beautiful in soul and richly blessed, you were the standard and
pillars of monastic women. Therefore, pray without ceasing
for us who celebrate your memory with love.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You disciplined your bodies by fasting and, with unceasing
prayers, implored the Giver of Life that you might receive
perfect forgiveness for your sins. Having received divine
pardon and the kingdom of heaven, now pray to Christ our
God for all of us.
Troparion to a Confessor, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,
luminary for the world, inspired adornment of monks
[adornment of bishops], O wise (Name), harp of the Spirit,
you enlightened all by your teachings; intercede with Christ
our God to save our souls.

555

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Divinely wise (Name), you practiced self-control and
stilled the desires of the flesh, O holy father. You flourished in
faith and flowered like the tree of life in Paradise.
Troparion to Unmercenary Healers, Tone 8:
Holy unmercenary healers and wonderworkers, treat us in
our weakness; freely you received, so freely give to us.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O glorious physicians and wonderworkers who have
received the grace of healing, you grant health to the afflicted.
By your care, defeat our shameless enemies and give
miraculous healing in the world.

556

Troparia and Kontakia
of the Lenten and
Flowering Triodion

557

558

Troparia and Kontakia of the Triodion

said from the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee,
and during the Holy Forty-Day Fast, to the Holy Pascha.
SUNDAY OF THE PUBLICAN AND PHARISEE
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Let us offer the Lord sighs like the publican. As sinners,
let us fall before Him, our Master; for He wills the salvation
of everyone. He grants forgiveness to all who repent for, while
remaining God, co-eternal with the Father, He took flesh for
our sake.
Or, this Kontakion, Tone 4:
Let us shun the boastful words of the Pharisee. Let us
learn the grandeur of the humble speech of the publican. It
summons us to repentance. O Savior of the world, have mercy
on Your servants.
SUNDAY OF THE PRODIGAL SON
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
Kontakion, Tone 3:
When I foolishly spurned Your fatherly glory, I squandered
the riches You had given me on evil deeds. So now I cry out to
559

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You with the voice of the prodigal son: I have sinned against
You, O merciful Father; accept my repentance and treat me as
one of Your hired servants.
MEAT-FARE SATURDAY
Troparion, Tone 8:
In the depth of Your wisdom, O only Creator, You govern
all with love and supply the needs of each. Now give rest to
the souls of Your servants, for they have placed their hope in
You, our Creator, Maker, and our God.
Glory: Kontakion, Tone 8:
With the saints, O Christ, give rest to Your servants, where
there is no pain, sorrow, nor mourning, but life everlasting.
Now and ever: Theotokion, in the same tone:
We have in You a defense and a refuge, and an advocate
acceptable to God, to Whom you gave birth, O Virgin
Theotokos, the salvation of the faithful.
SUNDAY OF MEAT-FARE
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
Kontakion, Tone 1:
When You come to the earth in glory, O God, and the
universe trembles, and a river of fire flows before Your
judgment seat, and the books are opened, and everything
hidden is revealed, deliver me then from the unquenchable
fire, and make me worthy to stand at Your right hand, O most
righteous Judge.
560

Troparia and Kontakia of the Triodion

SATURDAY OF CHEESE-FARE
We celebrate the memory of all the Venerable and Godbearing Fathers who shone forth in the ascetical life
through fasting
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Lord, You did delight the company of the faithful who
illumined the universe, preaching true worship and abolishing
infidelity and lies. Therefore, by their intercessions, preserve
in perfect security all those who glorify and magnify You, that
they may sing to You: Alleluia!
SUNDAY OF CHEESE-FARE
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
Kontakion, Tone 6:
O Guide to wisdom and Giver of insight, Teacher of the
ignorant and Protector of the poor, strengthen and enlighten
my heart, O Master. Word of the Father, give me words for,
behold, I do not restrain my lips from crying out to You: O
merciful Lord, have mercy on me, for I have fallen.
At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the Tone

561

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

On this Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon, Tone 8, Psalm 68
Do not hide Your face from Your servant; answer me
quickly for I am in distress. Come close to my soul and
redeem me.
1: Let Your help, O God, lift me up.
2: The poor when they see it will be glad.
3: God-seeking hearts will revive.
And again : Do not hide:
FIRST SATURDAY OF THE FAST
on which we commemorate
the miracle of the wheat by
the Holy and Great-martyr Theodore Tyro
Troparion, Tone 2:
Great are the accomplishments of faith. The holy martyr
Theodore rejoiced in the fountain of flames just as if resting
in calm water. Consumed in the fire, he was offered up like
a sacrifice of sweet-breads to the Holy Trinity. Through his
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Having accepted the faith of Christ in your heart like
a shield, you trampled down the adverse powers, O GreatSufferer. Therefore, you have been crowned eternally with a
heavenly crown, O Theodore, as one who is invincible.
FIRST SUNDAY OF THE FAST
which is The Sunday of Orthodoxy, on which we
celebrate the memory of the Holy Prophet Moses and
Aaron and the other Prophets, and we commemorate the
restoration of the Holy and Precious Icons
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
562

Troparia and Kontakia of the Triodion

Glory: Troparion of the Feast, Tone 2:
We bow before Your sacred image, O gracious Lord, and
beg forgiveness for our offenses, O Christ our God; for You,
of Your own good will, ascended the cross in Your human
nature to deliver from the enemy’s bondage those whom You
created. Therefore, we gratefully cry out to You: By Your
coming to save the world, O Savior, You have filled all with
joy.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
All your mysteries, O Theotokos, are beyond understanding
and most glorious; sealed by purity and preserved by virginity,
you have been acknowledged as the Mother who gave birth to
God. Pray to him for the salvation of our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Theotokos, the indescribable Word of the Father
became describable when He took flesh from you. Our soiled
image was restored to its original form, commingled with
divine beauty. This is the very salvation we profess, depicting
it in word and deed.
At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the tone
On Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon, Tone 8, Psalm 60
You have granted me the heritage of those who fear You.
1: From the ends of the earth I call: my heart is faint.
2: Let me hide in the shelter of Your wings.
3: So I will always praise Your Name.
And again: You have granted:

563

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

SECOND SUNDAY OF THE FAST
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Now the season for virtues has arrived and the Judge is at
the door. Without looking gloomy, let us fast, offering tears,
vigils, and alms, and let us exclaim: Our sins exceed the grains
of sand by the sea. But forgive us all, O Creator of All, that we
may receive the incorruptible crown.
At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the Tone
On this Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon
Do not hide Your face: See page 562.
THIRD SUNDAY OF THE FAST
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone
Glory, Troparion of the Cross, Tone 1:
Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.
Grant victory to Your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Now and ever, Theotokion
Kontakion of the Cross, Tone 7:
No longer does the flaming sword guard the gates of Eden,
for the tree of the cross has come to quench it wondrously.
564

Troparia and Kontakia of the Triodion

The sting of death and the victory of Hades have been driven
out. For You, O my Savior, stood and called out to those in
Hades: Enter again into paradise.
At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the Tone
On Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon:
For You ... grant me the heritage: See page 563.
FOURTH SUNDAY OF THE FAST
We celebrate the memory of our Venerable Father John,
Author of The Ladder.
Troparion and Kontakion of the ResurrectionTone.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 1:
O John, our God-bearing father, you were shown to be a
citizen of the desert, an angel in bodily form, and a worker
of miracles. Through fasting, prayers and vigils you received
heavenly gifts to heal the sick and the souls of those who, with
faith, run to you. Glory to Him Who gives you strength. Glory
to Him Who crowned you. Glory to Him Who works healing
for all through you.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 4:
John, our teacher and father, the Lord has raised you to the
heights of self-control, to be a true guiding star enlightening
the ends of the earth.
565

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the Tone
On this Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon
Do not hide Your face: See page 562.
THURSDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK
We sing the Order of the Great Canon
Kontakion, Tone 6:
My soul, my soul, arise! Why are you sleeping? The end
is drawing near, and you will be confounded. Awake, then,
and be watchful that Christ our God may spare you, for He is
everywhere present and fills all things.
SATURDAY OF THE FIFTH SUNDAY
We sing the Akathistos Hymn to the
Most Holy Theotokos
Troparion, Tone 8:
When he grasped the meaning of the mystical command,
the bodiless one stood instantly in Joseph’s tent. He said to the
woman who knew not wedlock: He Who bowed the heavens
when He came down is entirely contained in you without
change. Seeing Him in your womb taking the form of a slave,
I am amazed as I exclaim: Rejoice, O Unwedded Bride.
566

Troparia and Kontakia of the Triodion

Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Theotokos, valiant defender, your servants offer you
hymns of victory in thanksgiving, for you have delivered us.
But since you have invincible power, free us from all peril,
that we may exclaim to you: Rejoice, O Unwedded Bride.
FIFTH SUNDAY OF THE FAST
We celebrate the memory of
our Venerable Mother Mary of Egypt
Troparion and Kontakion and Hypakoj
of the Resurrection Tone
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
Mary, your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Once you were filled with all kinds of harlotry; but today,
through repentance, you have shown yourself to be a bride of
Christ. Yearning for the angelic life, you crushed the devils
with the weapon of the cross. Therefore, O glorious Mary, you
became a bride of the kingdom.
At Matins, the Prokeimenon of the Tone

567

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

On Sunday evening Vespers,
The Great Prokeimenon:
[For You ...] grant me the heritage: See page 563.
SIXTH SATURDAY
The Holy and Righteous Lazarus.
Troparion, Tone 1:
Christ our God, before Your passion You confirmed our
common resurrection when You raised Lazarus from the dead.
Therefore, like the children, we carry the symbols of victory
and cry out to You, the Victor over Death: Hosanna in the
highest! Blessed is He Who comes in the Name of the Lord.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O Christ, the Joy of All, the Truth, the Light, the Life,
and the Resurrection of the World, has appeared to those on
earth because of his goodness. He became the pattern of our
resurrection, granting divine forgiveness to all.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation came to
Bethany to raise the righteous Lazarus:

568

Troparia and Kontakia of the Flowering Triodion

PALM SUNDAY

Troparia and Kontakia of the

Flowering
Troparion,Triodion
Tone 1:

Christ our God, before Your passion You confirmed our
common resurrection when You raised Lazarus from the dead.
Therefore, like the children, we carry the symbols of victory
and cry out to You, the Victor over Death: Hosanna in the
highest! Blessed is He Who comes in the Name of the Lord.
And this Troparion, Tone 4:
Through baptism we were buried with You, O Christ our
God, and we have become worthy of immortal life by Your
resurrection. Therefore, we raise our voices in praise to You:
Hosanna in the highest! Blessed is He Who comes in the
Name of the Lord.
After the Third Ode
The Hypakoj, Tone 6:
Having first praised You with their palms, the ungrateful
people then crucified You; but we honor You with our
unchanging faith as our Benefactor, O Lord, and we
unceasingly cry out to You: Blessed is He Who comes to draw
Adam forth from the tomb.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
In heaven You are seated on a throne; but on earth upon a
colt, O Christ our God. You accepted the praise of angels and
the song of the children crying out to You: Blessed is He Who
comes to restore Adam.
569

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

At Matins the Prokeimenon, Tone 4, Psalm 8:
On the lips of children and of babes, You have found
praise.
Verse: How great is Your Name, O Lord our God, through
all the earth!
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation deigned
to enter Jerusalem seated on a colt of a donkey and accepted
the praise of the Hebrew children, have mercy on us and save
us:
At Vespers on Sunday evening, and until Holy
and Great Thursday:
May the Lord, Who came to his voluntary passion for our
salvation, Christ our true God:
HOLY AND GREAT MONDAY
At Matins upon Alleluia,
Troparion, Tone 8:
Behold the Bridegroom is coming in the middle of the
night. Blessed is the servant He shall find awake. But the one
He shall find neglectful will not be worthy of Him. Beware,
therefore, O my soul! Do not fall into a deep slumber, lest
you be delivered to death and the door of the Kingdom be
closed to you. Watch instead and cry out: Holy, Holy, Holy
are You, O God. Through the intercession of the Theotokos,
have mercy on us.
570

Troparia and Kontakia of the Flowering Triodion

Kontakion, Tone 8:
While Jacob wept over the loss of his son, Joseph,
wearing a king’s attire, nobly rode in a chariot. He refused
to be enslaved by the pleasures of Egypt. Therefore, God,
Who knows the secrets of the human heart and distributes
incorruptible crowns, covered him with glory.
Hymn of Light:
I see Your bridal chamber completely engulfed with light,
O my Savior, and I do not have a wedding garment to enter
and enjoy Your brightness; fill the garment of my soul with
light and save me, O Lord. Three times.

HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY
Troparion:
Behold the Bridegroom is coming in the middle of the
night:
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O wretched soul, think of your last hours. Be dismayed
at the rebuking of the fig tree. Act and double the talent given
you with a loving purpose. Be watchful and cry out: Grant
that we not be left outside the bridal chamber of Christ.
Hymn of Light:
I see Your bridal chamber:

571

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

HOLY AND GREAT WEDNESDAY
Troparion, Tone 8:
Behold the Bridegroom is coming in the middle of the
night:
Kontakion, Tone 4:
O gracious God, I sinned more than the Adulteress and
yet never offered refreshing teardrops. In silent prayer, I now
prostrate myself, kissing with love Your immaculate feet in
order to receive from You, O Master, the forgiveness of my
sins. I cry out to You: O Savior, deliver me from the murk of
my evil deeds.
Hymn of Light:
I see Your bridal chamber:
HOLY AND GREAT THURSDAY
At Matins, upon Alleluia,
Troparion, Tone 8:
While the illustrious disciples were enlightened as their
feet were washed at the supper, the ungodly Judas darkened
by a sick love of silver, betrayed You, the Just Judge, to
lawless judges. See how a money-hungry man hanged himself
because of it, and flee the greedy soul who would do such
things to the teacher. O Lord, so good to everyone, glory to
You. Three times.

572

Troparia and Kontakia of the Flowering Triodion

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Judas, the deceitful servant, when he stretched his hand
secretly and took bread, did therefore take the price of Him
Who made humanity with His own hands, thus remaining
reprobate.
Hymn of Light:
I see Your bridal chamber:
At the end of Matins, the Dismissal:
May the Lord, Who came to His voluntary passion for
our salvation, Christ our true God:
At the end of Vespers and Liturgy, the Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who, because of His surpassing
goodness, showed us the most excellent way of humility
when He washed His disciples’ feet, and humbled Himself
even unto the cross and burial:
HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY
Troparion:
While the illustrious disciples:
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O come, and let us all praise Him crucified for our sake,
just as did Mary when she beheld Him on the cross and said:
Even though You have suffered crucifixion, You are still my
Son and still my God.
573

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Exapostilarion:
The wise thief You made worthy of paradise in a single
moment, O Lord. By the wood of Your cross, illumine me as
well and save me.
Troparion at the Dismissal, Tone 4:
You have redeemed us from the curse of the law with Your
precious blood; nailed to the cross and pierced with the lance,
You have become a fountain of immortality for us; glory to
You, our Savior.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the
world suffered being spat upon, then suffered scourges,
wounds, crucifixion and death, have mercy on us and save us:
Glory: Troparion of the First Hour, Tone 1:
When You ascended Your cross, O Christ, You crushed
the tyranny and power of the Enemy; it is neither an angel
nor a human, but God Himself Who saves us: O Lord, glory
to You.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
What shall we call you, O Full of Grace? A Heaven; for
you gave rise to the Sun of Justice? A Paradise; for you have
brought forth the Flower of incorruption? A Virgin; for you
have remained undefiled? A pure Mother, holding in her holy
arms the Son Who is the God of all? Intercede with Him for
the salvation of our souls.

574

Troparia and Kontakia of the Flowering Triodion

Kontakion, Tone 8:
O come, and let us all praise Him crucified for our sake,
just as did Mary when she beheld Him on the cross and said:
Even though You have suffered crucifixion, You are still my
Son and still my God.
Glory: Troparion of the Third Hour, Tone 6:
O Lord, the children of Israel have condemned You to
death, You the Life of the world. Those who crossed the Red
Sea because of the staff of Moses, have nailed You to the wood
of the cross; those who tasted the honey from the rock, have
given You gall as food. Yet You suffered willingly to deliver
us from slavery to the Enemy. O Christ our God, glory to You.
Now and ever: Theotokion:
O Theotokos, you are the True Vine who gave birth to the
Fruit of Life: wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede
together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain
mercy for our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
[O come, let us all praise Him] crucified for our sake:
Glory: Troparion of the Sixth Hour, Tone 2:
O Christ God, You brought about salvation in the middle
of the earth. You stretched out Your all-pure hands on the cross
in order to gather together all the nations, who cry aloud: O
Lord, glory to You!

575

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Now and ever: Theotokion:
Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our
many sins, O Virgin Theotokos, intercede for us with the One
Who was born of you, for a mother’s prayer is a powerful
means for obtaining the Master’s favor. You are most worthy
of veneration, so do not turn away from the pleading of us
sinners; for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our
sake is full of mercy. And His power is sufficient to save us.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
[O come let us all praise Him] crucified for our sake:

Glory: Troparion of the Ninth Hour, Tone 8:
Seeing the Author of life hanging on the cross, the Good
Thief cried out with His act of faith. If the One crucified with
us were not God in the flesh, the sun would not have hidden
its rays, nor would the earth have trembled with fear. And
You patiently bear all this; remember me, O Lord, in Your
kingdom.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O come, and let us all praise Him crucified for our sake,
just as did Mary when she beheld Him on the cross and said:
Even though You have suffered crucifixion, You are still my
Son and still my God.
Dismissal of the Hours:
May Christ our true God, Who for us and for our salvation,
suffered the passion, the life-giving cross, and voluntary burial
in the flesh, have mercy on us and save us:
576

Troparia and Kontakia of the Flowering Triodion

GREAT AND HOLY SATURDAY
Troparion, Tone 2:
The noble Joseph took down Your most pure body from
the cross. He wrapped it in a clean shroud and with fragrant
spices laid it in burial in a new tomb.
Glory:
When You descended to death, O Immortal Life, You
destroyed Hades by the brilliance of Your divinity; and when
You raised the dead from the depths of the earth, all the
heavenly powers cried out: O Giver of Life, Christ our God,
glory to You.
Now and ever:
The angel standing by the tomb cried out to the myrrhbearing women: Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ has
shown Himself not subject to corruption.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
He Who closed the depths of the sea is beheld wrapped
in linen and embalmed with myrrh; the Deathless One is
placed in the tomb like One Who is dead. The women came
to embalm Him, weeping bitterly and crying: Behold the
Sabbath transcendent in blessings in which Christ has slept
and will rise on the third day.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who suffered the passion, the
life-giving cross, and voluntary burial in the flesh for our sake
and for all mankind, have mercy on us and save us:
577

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

578

ORDER OF THE HOLY
AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA
The principal celebrant with the priests go forth from the
church singing the sticheron, Tone 6:
Your resurrection, O Christ our Savior, the angels in
heaven praise with hymns; make us, on earth, also worthy
with a pure heart to extol and give glory to You.
The priest in a loud voice exclaims:
Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-creating and
undivided Trinity, always, now and ever and forever.
And we, responding Amen, the principal celebrant with
the other clergy sing aloud the appointed troparion, in Tone
5 [special tone]:
Christ is risen from the dead! By death He trampled
Death, and to those in the tombs He granted life.
And we also sing it in the same way, with sweet melody.
This troparion is sung three times by the principal
celebrant, and three times by us.
579

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then, the principal celebrant says the verses:
First: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let
those who hate Him flee from before His face!
And at each verse we sing the troparion:
Christ is risen: the entire troparion once.
Second: As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish, as wax melts
before a fire.
Christ is risen:
Third: So let the wicked perish at the presence of God, but let
the righteous ones rejoice.
Christ is risen:
Fourth: This is the day that the Lord has made; let us be glad
and rejoice in it.
Christ is risen: once.
Glory: Christ is risen: once.
Now and ever: Christ is risen: once.
Then the principal celebrant sings in a higher tone:
Christ is risen from the dead! By death He trampled Death:
580

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

And he opens the doors. The principal celebrant enters
with the precious cross, with two lamps borne before him, and
with the brethren, singing:
and to those in the tombs He granted life.
The three principal bells are struck, and all the bells are
rung.
The principal celebrant with the priests enter the altar,
and the deacon says the Great Litany:
In peace, let us pray to the Lord. [see p. 104-105]
Exclamation: For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is
due all glory, honor, and worship, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
And the principal celebrant begins the canon.

CANON
A Composition of John of Damascus.
Tone 1. Ode 1.
Irmos. It is the day of Resurrection. O People, let us be
enlightened by it. The Passover is the Lord’s own Passover,
since Christ our God has brought us from death to life and
from earth to heaven. We, therefore, sing the hymn of victory.
Versicle: Christ is risen from the dead!

581

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Let us cleanse our senses that we may see the risen Christ
in the glory of His resurrection and clearly hear Him greeting
us: “Rejoice”—as we sing the hymn of victory.
Let the heavens properly rejoice, and let the earth be glad,
and let the whole visible and invisible world celebrate; for
Christ, our everlasting joy is risen.
Then, the Little Ektenia, and the exclamation:
For You are the supreme ruler, and Yours are the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
now and ever and forever.

Ode 3.
Irmos. Come, let us partake of a new drink, not
miraculously produced from the barren rock, but from the
fountain of immortality, springing up from the tomb of Christ.
In Him is our firm strength.
Today all things are filled with light—earth and heaven
and the world beneath. Then let all creation celebrate the
resurrection of Christ. In Him is the firm foundation of all
things.
I was buried yesterday with You, O Christ; but today I
rise, resurrected with You. Yesterday I crucified myself with
You, O Savior. Now glorify me with You in Your kingdom.
The Little Ektenia, and the exclamation:
For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
582

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

Hypakoj, Tone 4:
The women with Mary before the dawn found the stone
rolled away from the tomb, and they heard the angel say:
“Why do you seek among the dead, as a mortal, the One Who
abides in everlasting light? Behold the linens of burial. Go
in haste and proclaim to the world that, having conquered
Death, the Lord is risen; for He is the Son of God, the Savior
of mankind.”

Ode 4.
Irmos. Let Habakkuk, speaking in behalf of God, stand
with us at the divine watch; let him show us the brilliant Angel
who proclaims: “Today, salvation comes to the world; for
Christ, being Almighty is risen.”
Christ had appeared as a man when He was born of the
Virgin. As a mortal, He was called “Lamb”. Being undefiled
and without blemish, He is our Passover; and as true God, He
is proclaimed perfect.
Christ, our blessed crown, was sacrificed of His own will
like a yearling lamb for all of us, and so became our cleansing
Pasch. From His tomb He shines on us again as the splendid
Sun of Righteousness.
David, ancestor of the Lord, danced and made music
before the Ark which was only a symbol. As God’s holy
people, let us witness the symbol fulfilled and rejoice in spirit;
for Christ, being Almighty, is risen.
The Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
583

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For You are a good God and You love mankind, and we
give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.

Ode 5.
Irmos. Let us rise at early dawn and bring to our Master
a hymn instead of myrrh, and we shall see Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, Who enlightens the life of all.
When those bound by chains in the realm of Death saw
Your boundless mercy, O Christ, they hastened to the light
with joy, praising the eternal Pasch.
Bearing torches let us meet the Bridegroom, Christ, as He
comes forth from his tomb; and let us greet, with festive song,
the saving Pasch of God.
The Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
For sanctified and glorified is Your all-honorable and
majestic Name: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever
and forever.

Ode 6.
Irmos. You have descended into the realm of Death,
O Christ, and have broken ancients bonds which held the
captive. You arose from the tomb on the third day like Jonah
from the whale.
When You arose from the tomb, O Christ, You preserved
its seals intact, just as in Your holy birth a virgin’s vow was
unbroken. You opened to us the gates of paradise.
584

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

O my Savior, being God, willingly You offered Yourself.
As a never-consumed yet living victim, You gave Yourself to
the Father. You arose from the tomb, resurrecting Adam, the
father of all.
The Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
For You are the King of peace and the Savior of our souls,
and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now
and ever and forever.

Kontakion, Tone 8:
Although You descended into the grave, O Immortal One,
You destroyed Hades’ power. You arose as a victor, O Christ
God. You exclaimed to the myrrh-bearing women: Rejoice!
You gave peace to Your apostles and granted resurrection to
the fallen.

Ikos:

Early in the morning before sunrise, as if it were already
day, myrrh-bearing virgins were seeking the Sun, previously
descended into the grave; and they cried out to one another:
“Come, O friends! Let us anoint with fragrant spices the lifegiving and yet already buried body of Christ Who resurrected
the fallen Adam. Let us hasten, as did the Magi, and adore
Christ and bring our myrrh as a gift to Him Who is wrapped
not in swaddling clothes but in a shroud. Let us weep and
exclaim: ‘Arise, O Master, granting resurrection to the
fallen!’”
Then we say:
Having beheld the resurrection of Christ let us worship the
holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross,
O Christ, and we glorify and praise Your holy Resurrection.
585

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

You are our God, and besides You we recognize no other,
and we call upon Your Name. Come, all you faithful, and let
us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ since, through the
cross, joy has come to all the world. Ever blessing the Lord,
let us extol His Resurrection since He, having suffered the
crucifixion, has destroyed Death by His death. Three times.

Sticheron, Tone 6:
Jesus is risen from the tomb, as He foretold, and granted
us everlasting life and great mercy.

Ode 7.
Irmos. God, Who saved the three youths from the furnace,
has become man and suffered as any mortal; but His passion
clothed His mortality with the splendor of incorruption. He is
the only Blessed One, God of our fathers, and is worthy of all
praise.
Pious women ran in tears to You, O Christ, bringing
myrrh to You as dead; but instead, they adored You in joy as
the living God and announced Your mystical Passover to Your
disciples.
We celebrate Your victory over Death, the destruction of
the deep abyss, and the birth of a new eternal life. With joy,
we praise the Author of all things, the only-blessed One, God
of our fathers, for He is worthy of all praise.
This most splendid and saving night is sacred and allworthy of solemnity. It heralds the bright day of resurrection
on which the Eternal Light in the flesh has shown forth from
the tomb to all.
586

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

The Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
For Yours is the might; and Yours are the kingdom and the
power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.

Ode 8.
Irmos. This is that chosen and holy day, feast of feasts,
most solemn day, only king and lord of all Sabbaths on which
we ever praise Christ.
Come, on this glorious day of resurrection, and partake of
the fruit of the new vine, the divine joy of Christ’s kingdom,
ever-praising Him as God.
Lift up your eyes, O Zion, and behold. See your children
coming to you. From the east, west, north, and south, they
come to you like stars of light divine, ever blessing Christ.
[O Most Holy Trinity, our God, glory to You!]
Trinitarian Hymn. O Almighty Father, Spirit, and Word,
three Persons, yet one essence, fullness of all divinity—we
have been baptized in You, and ever bless You.
Then, the Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
For blessed is Your Name, and glorified is Your kingdom,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Verse on Ode 9.
The angel exclaimed to her, full of grace: Rejoice, O pure
Virgin; and again, I say: Rejoice! Your Son is risen from the
587

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

grave on the third day and has raised the dead. Rejoice, all
you nations!

Ode 9.
Irmos. Shine in splendor, O new Jerusalem; for the glory
of the Lord is risen upon you, O Zion, now dance and be glad;
and you, pure Theotokos, rejoice in the resurrection of your
Son.
How pleasingly divine and sweet was Your voice, O
Christ, when You promised without fail to remain with us until
the end of time. We, the faithful rejoice in this firm foundation
of hope.
O Christ, Great and Sacred Pasch, Wisdom, Power and
Word of God, grant that we be with You in Your kingdom on
the never-ending day.
The Little Ektenia, and the Exclamation:
For all the heavenly Powers praise You, and we give glory
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever and forever.

Exapostilarion Samohlasen:
You, O King and Lord, have fallen asleep in the flesh as
a mortal man but on the third day You arose. You have raised
Adam from his corruption and made death powerless. You are
the Pasch of incorruption. You are the salvation of the world.
Three times.

588

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

Then, The Praises, Let everything that lives:
in Tone 1.
We interpolate four stichera. And we sing the stichera of
the Resurrection, Tone 1:
Verse: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His
surpassing greatness. [Psalm 150:2]
We praise Your saving passion, O Christ, and we glorify
Your Resurrection.
Verse: O praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him
with lute and harp. [Psalm 150:3]
You endured the cross and abolished death; You arose
from the dead. Make our lives peaceful, O Lord, for You alone
are most powerful.
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him
with strings and pipes. [Psalm 150:4]
You despoiled Hades and raised up humanity at Your
Resurrection, O Christ. Make us worthy to praise and glorify
You with a pure heart.
Verse: O praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise
Him with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and
that breathes give praise to the Lord. [Psalm 150:5-6]
We glorify Your divine condescension and sing hymns
to You, O Christ. You were born of the Virgin and remained
inseparable from the Father. As man, You suffered and
willingly endured the cross. Coming forth as if from a bridal
chamber, You arose from the grave to save the world. O Lord,
glory to You.
589

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then both choirs join together; they sing
the stichera of Pascha, Tone 5:
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and
let those who hate Him flee from before His face. [Psalm 67:2]
Today the sacred Pasch is revealed to us, holy and new
Pasch, the mystical Passover, the venerable Passover, the
Pasch which is Christ the Redeemer, spotless Pasch, great
Pasch, the Pasch of the faithful, the Pasch which is the key
to the gates of Paradise, the Pasch which sanctifies all the
faithful.
Verse: As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish, as wax
melts before a fire. [Psalm 67:3]
O women, be the heralds of good news and tell what you
saw; tell of the vision and say to Zion: “Accept the good news
of joy from us, the news that Christ has risen.” Exalt and
celebrate and rejoice, O Jerusalem, seeing Christ the King,
coming forth from the tomb like a Bridegroom.
Verse: So let the wicked perish at the presence of God, but
let the righteous ones rejoice. [Psalm 67:3-4]
The myrrh-bearing women arrived just before the dawn at
the tomb of the Giver of Life and found an angel seated on the
stone who spoke these words to them: “Why do you seek the
living among the dead? Why do you mourn the incorruptible
among those subject to decay? Go announce the good news to
His disciples.”
Verse: This is the day the Lord has made; let us be glad
and rejoice in it. [Psalm 117:24]
Pasch so delightful, Pasch of the Lord, is the Pasch—most
honored Pasch now dawned on us. It is the Pasch! Therefore,
590

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

let us joyfully embrace one another. O Passover, save us
from sorrow; for today Christ has shown forth from the tomb
as from a bridal chamber and filled the women with joy by
saying: Announce the good news to the Apostles.
Glory: now and ever, Tone 5:
This is the Resurrection Day! Let us be enlightened by this
Feast and let us embrace one another! Let us call “Brethren”
even those who hate us, and in the Resurrection, forgive
everything and let us sing:
Christ is risen from the dead! By death He trampled
Death; and to those in the tombs He granted life. Three times.
After this, the ektenia: Have mercy on us, O God: and the
exclamation. Then: Let us complete our morning prayer to the
Lord. And, after the exclamation, the Deacon: Wisdom! We:
Give the blessing. Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, the OneWho-Is, always, now and ever and forever. And we: Amen. O
God, strengthen:
Priest: O most holy Theotokos, save us.
Choir: Shine in splendor:
After this, the principal celebrant: Glory to You, O Christ
our God:
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead! By death He trampled
Death; and to those in the tombs He granted life. Lord, have
mercy, three. Master, give the blessing.

591

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

And immediately the principal celebrant says the dismissal
with the cross:
May Christ our true God, risen from the dead, by death
trampling Death and granting life to those in the tombs, have
mercy on us and save us through the prayers of His most
pure Mother and of all the saints, for Christ is good and loves
mankind.
Then, raising the cross, he says: Christ is risen, three
times. We respond: Indeed, He is risen, three times. Then, we
sing the final Christ is risen: three times, the entire troparion.
And following this we conclude the hymn: And to us He
granted life eternal. Let us bow before His resurrection on the
third day!
And we kiss the most pure cross, held in the hand of the
principal celebrant.

592

THE HOURS ON HOLY PASCHA
and on all of Bright Week

The priest beginning: Blessed is our God: we say three
times: Christ is risen from the dead: the entire troparion.
Then we say three times:
Having beheld the resurrection of Christ let us worship the
holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross,
O Christ, and we glorify and praise Your holy Resurrection.
You are our God, and besides You we recognize no other,
and we call upon Your Name. Come, all you faithful, and let
us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ since, through the
cross, joy has come to all the world. Ever blessing the Lord,
let us extol His Resurrection since He, having suffered the
crucifixion, has destroyed Death by His death.
Then the Hypakoj, once:
The women with Mary before the dawn found the stone
rolled away from the tomb, and they heard the angel say:
“Why do you seek among the dead, as a mortal, the One Who
abides in everlasting light? Behold the linens of burial. Go
in haste and proclaim to the world that, having conquered
Death, the Lord is risen; for He is the Son of God, the Savior
of mankind.”
593

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then the Kontakion, once:
Although You descended into the grave, O Immortal One,
You destroyed Hades’ power. You arose as a victor, O Christ
God. You exclaimed to the myrrh-bearing women: Rejoice!
You gave peace to Your apostles and granted resurrection to
the fallen.
And then this Troparion, once:
When Your body was in the tomb, and Your soul in Hades,
when You were in paradise with the thief, You were at the
same time, O Christ, as God upon Your throne with the Father
and the Spirit, infinite and filling all things.
Glory:
Your life-giving tomb, O Christ, has appeared to us as
truly more precious than paradise and more brilliant than any
other dwelling place. It is the source of our resurrection.
Now and ever: Theotokion
Rejoice, O sanctified dwelling place and divine tabernacle
of the Most High! It is through you, O Theotokos, that joy
is given to us; therefore we cry out: Blessed are you among
women, O Immaculate Lady!
Then, Lord, have mercy, 40. Glory: now and ever: More
honorable than the cherubim: In the Name of the Lord, Father,
give the blessing! Priest: Through the prayers of our holy
fathers: We say: Amen. And again we say: Christ is risen
from the dead: Three times. Glory: now and ever: Lord, have
mercy, three times. Give the blessing.
594

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

And the Dismissal of the First Hour.
The same model is sung for the 3rd, for the 6th, and the
9 Hour, and for Compline, likewise, also, for the Midnight
Service.
th

595

VESPERS ON THE EVENING OF THE
HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA
After the 9th Hour, and on the entire Bright Week, the
principal celebrant vests in all the priestly vestments. And
having stood before the Holy Table with the censer, he makes
the sign of the cross [with it], and says aloud:
Blessed is our God always, now and ever and forever. And
we respond: Amen. And he begins: Christ is risen from the
dead! By death He trampled Death; and to those in the tombs
He granted life. Three times. And we also respond three times.
And the principal celebrant says the introductory verses: 1st:
Let God arise: 2nd: As smoke vanishes: 3rd: So let the wicked
perish: 4th: This is the day the Lord has made: We sing on
each verse: Christ is risen: once after each. Glory: We again:
Christ is risen: Now and ever: We again: Christ is risen: And
again, the principal celebrant: Christ is risen from the dead!
By death He trampled Death: And we conclude: and to those
in the tombs He granted life. Then the Great Ektenia by the
Deacon: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
After this: Lord, I have called: and what follows.
The Entrance with the Gospel Book. O Joyful Light:
596

ORDER OF THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF PASCHA

Then, the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 7:
What God is as great as our God? You are the God Who
works wonders!
1: You showed Your power among the peoples. Your
strong arm redeemed Your people.
2: I said: Now I begin, and this is the will of the Most
High.
3: I remember the deeds of the Lord. I remember Your
wonders of old.
And again: What God is great:
After the prokeimenon, the deacon intones:
That we may be deemed worthy of hearing the holy Gospel,
let us pray to the Lord our God.
After this the principal celebrant reads the gospel, from
John, pericope 65: On the evening of the first day: the end:
in His Name.
After this, the ektenia: Let us all say: and Count us worthy,
O Lord…this evening: Then: Let us complete our evening
prayer:
After the exclamation we sing the stichera of the
Resurrection, Tone 2:
Your resurrection, O Christ our Savior, has enlightened
the whole universe; and through it, You call back to Yourself
all creation. Almighty God, glory to You.
Then the Paschal stichera, Tone 5: Today the sacred
Pasch: with their refrains. Glory: now and ever: It is the
Resurrection Day: Christ is risen, three times.
597

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Then the deacon: Wisdom. We: Give the blessing.
Principal celebrant: Blessed is Christ our God, the One-WhoIs: And we: O God, strengthen: Then the principal celebrant:
O most holy Theotokos, save us. And we: Shine in splendor:
Then the principal celebrant: Glory to You, O Christ our God:
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead! By death He trampled
Death; and to those in the tombs He granted life. Lord, have
mercy. 3. Give the blessing.
And immediately he says the Dismissal
with the cross:
May Christ our true God, risen from the dead, by death
trampling Death and granting life to those in the tombs, have
mercy on us and save us through the prayers of His most
pure Mother and of all the saints, for Christ is good and loves
mankind.
Then raising the cross, he says: Christ is risen, three times.
We respond: Indeed, He is risen, three times. Then we sing the
conclusion: Christ is risen: three times, the entire troparion.
And after, we conclude the hymn: And to us He granted life
eternal. Let us bow before His resurrection on the third day!

598

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost
on all of the Holy Fifty Days
MONDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
At Vespers the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 6
Psalm 113:
But our God is in the heavens; He does whatever He wills.
1: When Israel’s sons came forth from Egypt, Jacob’s
sons from an alien people, Judah became the Lord’s temple.
2: The sea fled at the sight; the Jordan turned back on its
course.
3: Why was it, sea, that you fled; that you turned back,
Jordan, on your course?
And again: But our God is in the heavens:
Dismissal on all of Bright Week:
Christ is risen from the Dead! By death He trampled
Death; and to those in the tombs He granted life, Christ our
true God:

599

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

TUESDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
At Vespers, the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 8,
Psalm 76:
I cry aloud to God that He may hear me.
1: In the day of my distress, I sought the Lord.
2: My soul refused to be consoled.
3: Your ways, O God, are holy.
And again: I cry aloud:
WEDNESDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
At Vespers, the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 7,
Psalm 54:
O God, listen to my prayer, do not hide from my pleading.
1: Attend to me and reply.
2: For they bring down evil upon me.
3: As for me, I will cry to God, and the Lord will save me,
evening, morning, and at noon.
And again: O God, listen:
THURSDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
At Vespers, the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 7,
Psalm 17:
I love You, Lord, my strength, my rock, my fortress, my
Savior.
1: My God is the rock where I take refuge; my shield, my
mighty help, my stronghold.
2: The Lord is worthy of all praise; when I call I am saved
from my foes.
600

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

3: From His temple He heard my voice; my cry came to
His ears.
And again: I love You:
FRIDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
At Vespers, the Great Prokeimenon, Tone 8,
Psalm 60:
You have granted me the heritage of those who fear You.
1: From the ends of the earth I call: my heart is faint.
2: Let me hide in the shelter of Your wings.
3: So I will always praise Your Name.
And again: You have granted:
SUNDAY OF THE HOLY APOSTLE THOMAS
Troparion, Tone 7:
Though the tomb had been sealed, O Life, from the grave
You arose, O Christ our God. Though the door had been
locked, You appeared among the disciples, O Resurrection
of All. Through them You restored an upright spirit in us
according to Your great mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
With his probing right hand, Thomas searched Your lifegiving side, O Christ our God. When You entered, although
the doors were locked, he cried out to You with the other
apostles: You are my Lord and my God.
601

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Dismissal:
Coming to His disciples although the doors were locked
and confirming Thomas in the faith, Christ our true God:
THE SUNDAY OF THE MYRRH-BEARERS
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 2:
When You descended to death, O Immortal Life, You
destroyed Hades by the brilliance of Your divinity; and when
You raised the dead from the depths of the earth, all the
heavenly powers cried out: O Giver of Life, Christ our God,
glory to You.
And: The noble Joseph took down Your most pure body
from the cross. He wrapped it in a clean shroud and with
fragrant spices laid it in burial in a new tomb. But You, O
Lord, arose on the third day, bestowing great mercy upon the
world.
And: The angel standing by the tomb cried out to the
myrrh-bearing women: Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ
has shown himself not subject to corruption. So now cry out:
The Lord is risen, bestowing great mercy upon the world.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
By Your resurrection, O Christ our God, You told the
myrrh-bearers to rejoice; and You stilled the weeping of Eve,
the first mother. You commanded Your apostles to proclaim:
The Savior is risen from the tomb.
602

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

Kontakion of Pascha:
Although You descended into the grave, O immortal One,
You destroyed Hades’ power. You arose as a victor, O Christ
God. You exclaimed to the myrrh-bearing women: Rejoice!
You gave peace to Your apostles and granted resurrection to
the fallen.
THE SUNDAY OF THE PARALYTIC
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 3:
Let the heavens rejoice, let the earth be glad; for the Lord
has shown the might of His arm. By His death the Lord has
trampled Death; He has become the first-born of the dead; He
has delivered us from the depths of Hades and has granted
great mercy to the world.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
O Lord, with Your divine authority, as You once raised
the paralytic, now raise my soul, paralyzed dreadfully with all
kinds of sin and disgraceful deeds, that, being saved, I may
cry out to You: Glory to Your power, O merciful Christ.
MID-PENTECOST WEDNESDAY
Troparion, Tone 8:
In the middle of the feast, quench the thirst of my soul
with streams of devotion. For You, O Savior, have exclaimed
to all: Let anyone who thirsts come to Me and drink. O Christ
our God, Fountain of Life, glory to You!
603

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 4:
In the middle of the Feast of the Law, O Christ God,
Creator and Lord of All, You told those present: Come and
draw the water of immortality. Therefore we adore You and
cry out with faith: Grant us Your mercies, for You are the
Fountain of our Life.
We say this troparion and kontakion eight days.
SUNDAY OF THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 4:
The joyful message of the resurrection was heard by
the women disciples from the angel, and being freed from
the ancestral curse, they boasted to the apostles: Death is
despoiled; Christ our God is risen, giving great mercy to the
world.
And the Troparion of Mid-Pentecost:
In the middle of the feast:
Kontakion, Tone 8:
When the Samaritan woman came to the well with faith,
she beheld You, O Water of Wisdom. She is famed in song,
for she drank deeply and inherited the kingdom from on high.
Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost, Tone 4:
In the middle of the Feast of the Law, O Christ God,
Creator and Lord of All, You told those present: Come and
draw the water of immortality. Therefore we adore You and
604

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

cry out with faith: Grant us Your mercies, for You are the
Fountain of Life.
THE SUNDAY OF THE BLIND MAN
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 5:
O faithful, let us praise and adore the Word eternal with the
Father and the Spirit, and born of the Virgin for our salvation.
For He chose to ascend the cross in the flesh and to suffer
death, and to raise the dead by His glorious resurrection.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
With eyes that are spiritually blind I come to You, O
Christ; and like the man who was blind since birth, I cry out
to You with repentance: You are a shining light to those in
darkness.
Kontakion of Pascha:
Although You descended into the grave: See page 603.
ASCENSION THURSDAY
OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST
Troparion, Tone 4:
You were taken up in glory, O Christ our God; You
gladdened the disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit.
By this blessing You confirmed that You are the Son of God,
the Redeemer of the world.
605

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 6:
When You had fulfilled the plan of salvation for us and
united the earthly with the heavenly, You were taken up in
glory, O Christ our God. Never parting from us but remaining
constantly, You proclaim to those who love You: I am with
you and no one can be against you.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation ascended
in glory from us to heaven and is seated at the right hand of
God and Father, have mercy on us and save us:
SUNDAY OF THE HOLY FATHERS
OF THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCIL,
OF NICEA
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 6:
Angelic powers appeared at Your tomb, and the guards
became like dead men. Mary stood at the tomb seeking Your
most pure body. You despoiled Hades without a challenge.
You, the Giver of Life, met the Virgin. O Lord, risen from the
dead, glory to You.
Troparion of the Holy Fathers, Tone 8:
O Christ our God, You are above all praise. You have
established our fathers as beacons on the earth, leading us all
to the true faith through them. O most merciful Lord, glory to
You!

606

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

Then, Troparion of the Ascension:
You were taken up in glory: See page 605.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
The preaching of the apostles and the teaching of the
Fathers have confirmed the one faith of the Church, which she
wears as the garment of truth, woven from the theology on
high, as she faithfully imparts and glorifies the great mystery
of devotion.
Kontakion of Ascension:
When You had fulfilled the plan of salvation for us: See
page 606.
SATURDAY BEFORE PENTECOST
We celebrate the memory of our departed fathers and
brethren through the ages.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In the depth of Your wisdom: See page 168.
Glory: now and ever: Theotokion,
in the same tone:
We have in you: See page 168.

607

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Kontakion, Tone 8:
With the saints, O Christ: See page 174.
SUNDAY OF HOLY PENTECOST
Troparion, Tone 8
Blessed are You, O Christ our God. You have shown the
fishermen to be all-wise, sending down upon them the Holy
Spirit. Through them You have caught the whole world in
Your net. O Lover of Mankind, glory to You.
Kontakion, Tone 8
When the Most High descended and confused tongues,
He scattered nations. When He distributed tongues of fire, He
called all to unity. We also, with one voice, glorify the Most
Holy Spirit.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation sent
down the All-Holy Spirit from heaven in tongues of fire upon
His holy disciples and apostles, have mercy on us and save us:
SUNDAY OF ALL SAINTS
Troparion of the Resurrection, Tone 8:
You descended from on high, O merciful One. You
accepted burial for three days to free us from our passions. O
Lord, our Resurrection and our Life, glory to You.
608

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

And of All Saints, Tone 4:
Your Church throughout the world, O Lord, clothed with
the blood of Your martyrs as with royal purple and linen, cries
out to You through them, O Christ our God: Send down Your
mercies upon Your people, grant peace to Your world, and
great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion of All Saints, Tone 8:
To You, O Lord, Gardener of all Creation, the world
offers the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature.
Through their prayers and through the Theotokos, preserve
Your Church, Your dwelling place, in perfect peace, O most
merciful One.
THURSDAY
OF THE WEEK OF ALL SAINTS
We solemnly adore the Most Pure Mysteries
of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
[Not observed in the Metropolia of Pittsburgh]
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your memorial, O Christ our God, has shined forth for
the world a festive day, for from You fishermen learned to
offer You an unbloody sacrifice of bread and wine, thus
perpetuating Your divine memorial. Celebrating it we also cry
out: O Lord, glory to You.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Behold, Christ is offered as nourishment for all! Come, let
us prostrate and worship Christ God hidden in these mysteries
609

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

and cry out with devotion: O Master, purify our souls and
burn away our sins that we may not be burned ourselves by
unworthily receiving this communion.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who because of His surpassing
goodness, gave us His Body to eat, and His true Blood to
drink given to us for our salvation:
FRIDAY OF THE THIRD WEEK,
The Feast of the Most Sweet Jesus Christ,
Our Lord and God and Savior,
The Lover of Mankind
[Not observed in the Metropolia of Pittsburgh]
Troparion, Tone 6:
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: since we
have no defense, we sinners offer this supplication to you, our
Master; have mercy on us.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Unconquered King and Lord, Vanquisher of the Nether
World, I, Your creature and servant, sing Your praise for
having delivered me from eternal death. Since Your mercies
are boundless, free me from every harm as I sing: O Jesus,
Son of God, have mercy on me!
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God Who willingly hung on the cross
and had His side pierced with a lance and Who loved His own
until the end:
610

Troparia and Kontakia of the Pentecost

SATURDAY OF THE THIRD WEEK,
The Co-Sufferings of the Most Holy Theotokos.
[Not observed in the Metropolia of Pittsburgh]
Troparion, Tone 6:
At the foot of the cross of her Son stood the virgin Mother
with the virginal disciple. She could not bear to gaze upon Him
lifted up on the cross. Overcome by grief she cried out: How
can You suffer when God cannot suffer? My Son, I glorify
Your unspeakable benevolence which surpasses every mind.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Seeing You nailed to the cross, Jesus, and witnessing
Your voluntary sufferings, O Master, the virgin Mother cried
out: Woe is me, O sweet Child! How unjustly You bear these
wounds, O Healer of human infirmities! By Your mercy You
have delivered all from corruption.

611

612

Menologion

613

614

On Signs
for Feasts of the Master and
of the Theotokos and of the Saints
Be it known that feasts are divided into Great, Middle,
and Small.
The Great Class of Feasts are the following:
The Feasts of Christ
The Feasts of the Theotokos
The Nativity and the Beheading of
		
Saint John the Baptist
The Feast of the Leaders of the Apostles,
		
Peter and Paul.
In the liturgical books these great feasts are denoted by a
cross in a circle:
This indicates that the feast has a vigil and the entire
service for the feast is taken according to the rule.
The Middle Class of Feasts is divided into two:
The first group is designated by a cross with a half circle.
This group has a vigil and the Canon of the Theotokos is
sung at Matins according to the rules.
The second group is designated by a cross.
This group has no vigil. At Vespers: “Blessed is the
615

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

man…”, the First Antiphon of the First Kathisma is taken, and
on the Psalm 140 “Lord, I have cried to you…”, six stichera
are taken, or, if desired, eight. There are three readings from
the Scriptures and the Apostichera. At Matins the Polyeleos is
sung. There is also a Gospel reading. There are eight odes at
the Canon. The Great Doxology is sung, and all the rest of the
service according to the rules.
The Small Class of Feasts has two groups.
The first group of the Small Class is designated by three
dots in an imperfect [open] circle printed in red.
At Vespers the usual Kathisma is chanted. On the Psalm
140 “Lord, I have cried to you…” six stichera are taken. There
are six odes of the Canon at Matins. The Great Doxology is
sung and all the rest of the service according to the rules.
The second group of the Small Class is designated by
three dots in an imperfect [open] circle printed in black.
On the Psalm 140 “Lord, I have cried to you…” at Vespers
there are only six stichera. At Matins there are six odes at the
Canon. At the Liturgy all is taken according to the rules.
When there is no sign whatsoever, there are but three
stichera at Vespers and four at the Canon at Matins.

616

Menologion

1

September

The Beginning of the Indiction, that is,
the New Church Year.
Our Venerable Father Simeon the Stylite
and his Mother (459).
The Synaxis of the most holy Theotokos of Miasena.
The Holy Martyr Aeithalas (380).
The Forty Holy Women martyred with their 		
Instructor Ammon the Deacon (313).
The Holy Martyr Callista and her two Brothers,
Evodius and Hermogenes (309).
Joshua the Just, Son of Nun.
Troparion of the New Year, Tone 2:

O Lord, Maker of the universe, Who alone have power
over times and seasons, bless the crown of this year with Your
bounty, preserve Your country in safety, keep Your people in
peace, and save us through the prayers of the Theotokos.
And of the Venerable Father, Tone 1:
You became a column of endurance and rivaled the
forefathers, O venerable one, becoming like Job in your
sufferings and like Joseph in your trials, like the bodiless
angels, though you lived in the flesh. O Simeon, our father,
pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
617

Menologion - September

And of the Theotokos, Tone 1:
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos full of grace, refuge and
intercessor of the human race, for from you the Savior of the
world was incarnate. As you alone are Mother and Virgin,
ever-blessed and most-glorified, pray to Christ God to grant
peace to the whole universe.
Kontakion of the New Year, Tone 2:
O Christ the King Who dwells on high, Creator and
Maker of all that is visible and invisible, You Who made both
day and night, and time and years, now bless the crown of
this new year. Protect and keep in peace our government,
Your right-believing kings, this city, and Your people, O Most
Merciful One.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 2:
You sought that which is on high and became like an angel.
You made of your pillar a chariot of fire. Now that you are a
companion of the angels, join them in praying ceaselessly to
Christ God for all of us, O venerable father.

2

The Holy Martyr Mammas (274).
Our Venerable Father John the Faster, Patriarch of
Constantinople (595).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Mammas, O Lord our God: see page 550.

618

Menologion - September

Troparion of the Venerable Hierarch, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 3:
O holy Mammas, with the staff God gave to you, lead
your people as a flock to life-giving pastures; crush the fierce
and invisible enemies beneath the feet of those who sing to
you; for all those in danger have received you as their fervent
intercessor.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 3:
You proved yourself a heavenly vessel of abstinence, O
blessed John, and a lasting treasure of piety. Your life was
radiant with perfect self-control, and you enriched the poor
with alms, O venerable father; pray to Christ God to give
great mercy to us.

3

The Holy Priest-Martyr Anthimus, Bishop of
Nicomedia (303).
Our Venerable Father Theoctistus, Companion of our
Venerable Father Euthymius the Great (431).
Troparion of a Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom, and
your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundred-fold; you
became a shining torch over the world. O Theoctistos, our
father, pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
619

Menologion - September

Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:
You were outstanding among bishops and traveled the
path to martyrdom. You vanquished pagan idol worship and
were the protector of your flock, O God-wise one. Therefore,
we now honor you, mystically crying out: deliver us from
dangers through your prayers, O ever-memorable Anthimus.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 4:
You joined the great Euthymius in the desert, and you
became an angel on earth with your good works. O Father, you
cleanse the hearts of the faithful by the power of wonderful
signs. We venerate you with love for this, O Theoctistos.

4

The Holy Priest-Martyr Babylas, Bishop of Great
Antioch (283).
The Holy Prophet Moses, who saw God.
Troparion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life and succeeded to
their throne, divinely inspired bishop. You found access to
contemplation in the active life. Therefore, you rightly taught
the word of truth and struggled for the faith to the shedding of
your blood. O priest-martyr Babylas, pray to Christ our God
to save our souls.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory of your prophet Moses, O
Lord, we implore you to save our souls through his prayers.
620

Menologion - September

Or this troparion in the same tone:
O prophet Moses, you reached the summit of virtues. By
this you came to see the glory of God. You received the tablets
of the grace-giving Law and became the crown of prophets
and a mystery of piety; for you carried grace deep within you.
Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 8:
O glorious Babylas, the Church glorifies you. Today
you are revered as a preacher of holiness and the fortitude
of martyrs. Since you have confidence before the Lord, beg
Christ to protect us; for we praise and glorify you, O longsuffering martyr.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
Because their prophecy is fulfilled among us, Moses,
Aaron, and the choir of prophets rejoice. The cross is
triumphant today because by it You saved us. Through their
prayers, O Christ God, have mercy on us.

5

The Holy Prophet Zachary [and his Wife, the
Holy and Venerable Elizabeth], Parents of the
glorious John the Forerunner.
Troparion of Zechariah, Tone 4:

Arrayed in the vestment of a priest, O wise Zechariah,
you offered in a priestly manner worthy whole-burnt offerings
according to the law of God. You became a shining light and a
witness of the mysteries, clearly bearing within you the signs
of grace, O all-wise one. You were slain by the sword in God’s
temple. O prophet of Christ, together with the Forerunner,
intercede with God that He may save our souls.
621

Menologion - September

Kontakion of Zechariah, Tone 3:
Today Zechariah the prophet and priest of the Most
High, and the father of the Forerunner, has set the table of his
memorial and mixed the drink of righteousness, nourishing
all the faithful. For them he has died as a divine mystic of the
grace of God.

6

The Commemoration of the Miracle of the Holy
Archangel Michael at Colossae in Chionia.
The Holy Martyr Eudoxius and his Companions
(c. 311).
Our Venerable Father Archippus.
Troparion of the Archangel, Tone 4:

Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us by your prayers and to
shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Eudoxius, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Archangel, Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.
622

Menologion - September

Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 8:
You gathered wealth in heaven and showered it upon the
earth. You gave bread to the hungry and received a glorious
crown. You are resplendent in your confession of Christ. You
were brave and died at the hands of the law; thus you have
earned the wages of your work. O long-suffering Eudoxius,
pray to Christ God to grant us remission of sins.

7

Pre-festive Day of the Nativity of the most
Holy Theotokos.
The Holy Martyr Sozon (304).
Troparion of the Prefestive, Tone 4:

Today is born to us from the root of Jesse and the loins
of David, Mary, the godly child. Therefore, all creation
rejoices and is renewed. Heaven and earth rejoice together.
You families of nations sing her praise. Joachim is elated and
Anna cries out in celebration: the barren woman gives birth to
the Theotokos and the Sustainer of our life.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Sozon, O Lord our God, in his struggle,
received an incorruptible crown from You. With Your
strength, he brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly
valor of demons. Through his prayers, O Christ our God, save
our souls.
Kontakion of the Theotokos, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, is born from a
barren womb according to the divine plan. She is the inviolate
bridal chamber of the heavenly Bridegroom. The chariot of
623

Menologion - September

the Word is made ready, for this is why she was preordained to
be the gateway of God and truly the Mother of Life.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 2:
Let us gather today and sing aloud to Sozon, the genuine
and God-wise martyr, masterful sufferer for piety, mystical
seer of divine grace, generous provider of healing; for he
prays to Christ God for all of us.

8

THE NATIVITY OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY,
THE THEOTOKOS AND
EVER-VIRGIN MARY.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your birth, O Virgin Theotokos, heralded joy to the
universe; for from you arose the Sun of Justice, Christ our
God. Removing the curse, He gave the blessing, and by
destroying Death, He granted us eternal life.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
At your holy birth, O Immaculate One, Joachim and Anna
were freed from the reproach of childlessness and Adam and
Eve from the corruption of death. Your people, delivered from
the guilt of their faults, celebrate your birth and cry out: the
barren woman gives birth to the Theotokos and Sustainer of
our Life.

624

Menologion - September

9

The Synaxis of the Holy and Just Grandparents
of God Joachim and Anna.
The Holy Martyr Severian (320).
Troparion of the Feast
And of the Saints, Tone 2:

We celebrate the memory of Your grandparents, O Lord,
and we pray to You to save our souls.
Or this one, Tone 1:
Joachim and Anna, since you were righteous under the law
of grace, you gave birth to the God-given infant for our sakes.
Therefore, today the Church of God solemnly celebrates your
honorable memory joyfully in radiance, giving glory to God
Who has raised up a horn of salvation for us from the House
of David.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Severian, O Lord our God, See page 550.
Kontakion of the Grandparents, Tone 3:
Today Anna rejoices because the chains of infertility are
broken. She feeds the most pure Lady and invites all to sing
to Him Who gave for all people the only Mother and Virgin
from her womb.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 1:
With a soul armed with courage, O God-wise one, you
yourself were given over to various sufferings because you
were enflamed with love of the Master, O most-wealthy one.
Therefore, you accused the unjust torturer, O Severian, and
you were given an incorruptible triumphal crown by God.
625

Menologion - September

10

The Holy Martyrs Menodora, Mitrodora, and 		
Nymphodora (306).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Women Martyrs, Tone 4:

You traded violent tortures and bitter death for eternal
life. Three virgins professed the Uncreated Trinity before a
false judge at an illegal trial. You followed the footsteps of the
slaughtered Lamb when they pierced you with a sword. Pray
for those who honor your memory.
Kontakion of the Women Martyrs, Tone 4:
Fearless as you were in your struggles for the Holy Trinity
and because of your sisterly love for each other, you defeated
the enemy of your spiritual life. Therefore, in the company
of the five virgins you entered victoriously into the heavenly
mansions where you are forever joyful with the angels in the
presence of the King of all.

11

Our Venerable Mother Theodora of Alexandria (490).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:

In you, O mother, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
626

Menologion - September

care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
Theodora, your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 2:
Having exhausted your body with fasting, with vigilant
prayers you entreated the Creator concerning your deeds, that
you might receive complete remission. You manifestly acquired
this, O mother, having shown us the path of repentance.

12

The Holy Priest-Martyr Autonomus (c. 300).
Troparion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:

As you are a venerable bishop and a martyr for the faith,
the Church calls us to praise your holy memory and to celebrate
with faith, O splendid and glorious Autonomus, who pleased
the Trinity. Pray for us to God, the only Lover of Mankind.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O most wise one, you worthily offered the Divine
Mysteries, You became an acceptable offering, O God-blessed
one. You drank from the cup of Christ, O most glorious one;
O candlelabrum of the whole world, pray unceasingly for all
of us.
On this day is the Leave-taking of the Feast of the
Nativity of the most Holy Theotokos.

627

Menologion - September

13

The Commemoration of the Dedication of the
		
Holy Church of the Resurrection of
		
Christ our God in Jerusalem (335).
Prefestive of the Exaltation of the Precious
		
and Life-creating Cross
The Holy Bishop-Martyr Cornelius
the Centurion.
Troparion of the Dedication, Tone 4:

Lord, Life, and Resurrection of All, You showed the
beauty of the holy dwelling place of Your glory on earth like
the splendor of the firmament on high. Make it stand firm
forever. Through the Theotokos, accept our prayers which we
unceasingly offer to You within it.
Troparion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life, See page 551.
Troparion of the Prefestive, Tone 4:
Lord, we offer to You in intercession the goodness of
Your life-creating cross which You gave to us, Your unworthy
people. Save our nation and Your Church which implores You
through the Theotokos. For You alone love mankind.
Kontakion of the Dedication, Tone 4:
You have made of the Church a resplendent heaven,
enlightening all the faithful. Therefore, we stand in the midst
of this holy dwelling place and we cry out to You: make firm
this house, O Lord.
628

Menologion - September

Or this one, Tone 2:
Grant the renewal of the spirit in our hearts and the
enlightenment of our souls to those who faithfully restore the
temple - Your home. For You have blessed its creation in honor
of Your Divine name, the Only One glorified in the saints!
Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:
O God-wise Cornelius, priest of the Mysteries, the
Church, receiving you as the holy first-fruit of the Gentiles, is
enlightened by the acts of your good deeds.
Kontakion of the Prefestive, Tone 8:
Today the saving wood shines forth from the bosom of the
earth. It is reverently lifted up in the church by the hands of
the bishop. The whole world prostrates and kisses it with awe.
Save us through Your cross, O Lord.

14

THE UNIVERSAL EXALTATION OF THE
PRECIOUS AND LIFE-CREATING CROSS.
Troparion, Tone 1:

Save Your people, O Lord, and bless your inheritance.
Grant victory to your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.
629

Menologion - September

15

The Holy Great Martyr Nicetas (372).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:

Your martyr, Nicetas, O Lord, see page 550.
Or, this Troparion, in the same tone:
You fervently took up the cross of Christ like a sword, and
you hastened to fight the enemy. You were burnt to death for
Christ, and thus you offered up your priestly soul to the Lord.
You have been rewarded with the gifts of healing from Him,
O great-martyr Nicetas; now pray to Christ God to save our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O Nicetas, your name means victory. You crushed the
power of deception by your resistance and received the crown
of victory through your suffering. You rejoice with the angels
in glory, praying unceasingly with them to Christ God for all
of us.

16

The Holy Great Martyr Euphemia the
All-Praiseworthy (303).
Troparion of the Feast.

630

Menologion - September

And the Troparion of the Saint, Tone 4:
Your lamb Euphemia, O Jesus, cries out in a loud voice: I
love You, my Bridegroom; I seek You with painful longing; I
am crucified with You; in your baptism, I am buried with You;
I suffer for You that I may reign with You; and I die for You
that I may live with You. Receive me as a spotless sacrifice
immolated with love for You. By her prayers, O merciful One,
save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You honorably completed your good ascetic struggle,
all-praised Euphemia, and after your death you poured out
miraculous wonders and sanctified us. Therefore, we sing
your holy dormition, flowing into your divine church with
faith so that we may deliver ourselves from spiritual illnesses
and gain the grace of your miracles.

17

The Holy Martyr Sophia (Wisdom) and her three
Children, Faith [Vera], Hope [Nadežda],
and Charity [L’uba] (c. 137).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

The Church solemnly celebrates and rejoices over the
newly-born children and their radiant mother. Named for
Wisdom and like her name, she gave birth to three children
equal to the three theological virtues. In the company of these
three wise virgins, she gazes on God the Word and Chaste
Groom. We join her in her happiness spiritually and sing: O
thrice-blessed martyrs, Faith, Hope, and Charity, make us firm
in faith, hope, and charity.
631

Menologion - September

Kontakion, Tone 1:
The three sacred branches of honorable Sophia, Faith
and Hope and Charity, have shown forth. Through grace they
confounded the wisdom of the Greeks. Through their suffering
and through being revealed as bearers of victory, Christ, the
Master of All, granted incorruptible crowns to them.

18

Our Venerable Father Eumenius the Wonder-worker,
Bishop of Gortyna (7th Century).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 7:

You enriched your life with fasting; you loved the poor
and gave them all you had. You were brighter than the sun
in virtue, cheering the sad and comforting the mourners. By
virtue of these riches and by your prayers, O father Eumenius,
now pray Christ to forgive our sins.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Illumined by the Divine Light, O all-blessed Eumenius,
enlighten us who sing of your honorable and glorious and
holy death with love. O father and hierarch Eumenius, pray
unceasingly for all of us.

632

Menologion - September

19

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus, Sabbatius, and
Dorymedontus (c. 227).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 8:

God is praised in the Holy Trinity, and we praise the trinity
of martyrs, Trophimus, Sabbatius, and Dorymedontus. By
their faith, they conquered the enemy. Through their prayers,
O Christ God, have mercy on us.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 8:
The Church honors and glorifies your light-bearing
passion as a foundation of martyrs and confirmation of piety.
O ever-hymned blessed passion-bearer, divinely wise and
glorious Trophimus, and those who suffered with you, implore
cleansing for those who profess you, for you are invincible.

20

The Holy Martyr Eustace and his Companions
(118).
The Holy Martyrs and Confessors, the Great
Prince Michael and his Counselor Theodore,
Wonder-workers of Chernigov (1244).
Troparion of the Feast.

633

Menologion - September

Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God, in their struggles received
incorruptible crowns from You. With Your strength, they
brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly valor of
demons. Through their prayers, O Christ our God, save our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O holy Eustace, you were an imitator of Christ in His
passion. You drank of His cup with courage and thereby
became a sharer of His glory, receiving divine forgiveness
from on high from the God of all.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Having completed your life as martyrs, having been
adorned with the crowns of confessors flowing up to the
heavens, O wise Michael with brave Theodore, pray to Christ
God to protect your country according to His great mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Perceiving an earthly kingdom as nothing and having
abandoned passing glory, you came to the labor of voluntary
ascetic effort. You preached the Trinity to the impure torturers,
O passion-bearer Michael and brave Theodore. Standing
before the King of Powers, pray to protect your country
without harm, and for us who venerate you unceasingly.

634

Menologion - September

21

The Holy Apostle Quadratus of Magnesia (c. 130).

His service is sung on the twenty-second day of this
month with the Priest-Martyr Phocas.
On this day is the Leave-taking of the Feast of
the Precious cross.

22

The Holy Priest-martyr Phocas, Bishop of Sinope
(103).
The Holy Prophet Jonah.
Our Venerable Father Jonah the Priest, Father of
Theophane the Composer of Canons and
Theodore the Branded (9th Century).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle Quadratus, intercede with the merciful
God that He may grant our souls forgiveness of sin.
Troparion of Phocas, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate our prophet Jonah: see page 548.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 8:
O Lord, the world offers You the Apostle Quadratus, a
precious hierarch and a courageous sufferer. The world honors
his honorable memory with hymns, always asking remission
for its sins through his intercession, O merciful Lord, to those
who sing His praise.
635

Menologion - September

Kontakion of Phocas, Tone 6:
As a bishop you offered the sacrifice, O father, and at the
end of your life you offered yourself. You gave witness to
Christ God before the law, strengthened by angels and ready
for death. Be ever with those who sing to you: be with us,
Phocas, and never against us.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 4:
You accepted God’s decree and became a marvelous
prophet. You remained in the whale for three days as an image
of the third day Resurrection. You left the whale unharmed.
You were a confessor of the faith in the great city of Nineveh.
For all of this we come to praise you, Jonah, as a type of Christ
God Who loves mankind.

23

The Conception of the Honorable, Glorious
Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist John.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Joy to you, O barren one, unable to give birth; behold, you
conceive today the one who is truly a lamp of the Sun, who
will enlighten the whole world that suffers from blindness.
Rejoice, O Zechariah, and cry out in all confidence: the
prophet of the Most High is about to be born!
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Great Zechariah is radiant in joy with his wife, the allglorious Elizabeth, for she has conceived John the Forerunner
whom the angel announced with rejoicing, and whom we
humans honor properly as the mystical passage of grace.
636

Menologion - September

24

The Holy Martyr, First Among Women, and 		
Equal to the Apostles, Thecla (51).
Troparion, Tone 4:

O bride of God, Thecla, you were instructed by the words
of Paul; you were made firm in the faith by Peter. You were
revealed the first martyr called by God among women and
the first woman to suffer. You walked into the flames as into
a flowering garden; the beasts and the brutes were frightened
of you, for you were armed with the cross. O all-praiseworthy
Thecla, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
You were radiant with the goodness of virginity and
you were adorned with the crown of martyrdom. You were
entrusted with the work of the apostles, O Virgin Thecla, for
you are most glorious since you transformed the flames of the
fire into dew. Through your prayers, you tamed the anger of
the youth, for you were the first woman to suffer martyrdom.

25

Our Venerable Mother Euphrosyne (479).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: See page 554.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

When you longed for life in the highest, you turned away
from the longest delight of the world. You put on the clothing
of a man, all beautiful one, and abandoned your earthly
betrothed for Christ your Bridegroom before the time.
637

Menologion - September

26

The Passing of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist
John the Theologian.
Troparion, Tone 2:

Beloved Apostle of Christ God, hasten to deliver a
defenseless people. He Who accepted that you lay your head
on His breast will also accept you bowing in intercession. Pray
to Christ, O Theologian, that He may overcome the darkness
of pagan nations, and beg that He grant us peace and abundant
mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Who can tell of your mighty deeds, O virgin saint? You
pour forth miracles, and you are a source of healings, and as
a theologian and the friend of Christ, you intercede for our
souls.

27

The Holy Martyr Callistratus and his Companions
(304).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: See page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You suffered many wounds and received crowns from God,
O blessed one. Pray to Christ for us who keep the feast of your
memory, O most-great Callistratus, and you blessed martyrs
who suffered with him. You bring peace to the flock and the
people, for you are the confirmation of the faithful.
Our Venerable Father Nilus, Founder and Hegumen
of the Monastery of Grottaferrata.
638

Menologion - September

28

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Chariton (362).
Holy Wenceslaus, Prince of the Czechs (929).

Troparion, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: See page 667.
Or this in the same tone:
You mingled your confession in the fountain of your
flowing tears and the deeds of your will, O venerable Chariton,
and held to committing no sins, and so are a pure intercessor
before God the Master of all for those who in faith keep your
memory. Therefore, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O divinely minded Chariton, you found your delight in
the monastic life. You conquered the passions of your body
and increased in faith; you blossomed forth like the Tree of
Life in the midst of paradise, O all-blessed and holy father.
The Synaxis of the Venerable Fathers of the Monastery
of the Caves who repose near the Venerable Anthony.

29

Our Venerable Father Cyriacus the Anchorite (557).
Troparion, Tone 1:

You made the wilderness your dwelling, O father
Cyriacus, the bearer of God. You became an angel in the
flesh and a wonderworker. Through prayers, fast, and vigils,
you obtained from God special graces to heal the sick and to
sanctify the souls of those who come to you with trust. Glory
to the One Who gave you strength! Glory to the One Who
crowned you! Glory to the One Who through your intercession
grants healing to all!
639

Menologion - September

Kontakion, Tone 8:
The holy lavra always honors you as a powerful protector
and intercessor, and yearly celebrates your memory. Since
you have confidence before the Lord, keep us safe from our
enemies, so that we may cry out: rejoice, O thrice-blessed
father.
Another Kontakion, Tone 2:
With the divine weapon of purity of spirit, and armed
with unceasing prayer as with a powerful spear, you
were like a sickle cutting down the demonic temptation.
Cyriacus our father, pray unceasingly for all of us.

30

The Holy Priest-Martyr Gregory, Bishop of
Great Armenia (332).
Troparion, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life: See page 551.
Or, this Troparion in the same tone:
Today the daystar of the Unsetting Light, the greatest
bishop and the long-suffering shepherd, the truly heroic
pastor, the model of ascetics and martyrs, the radiant glory
of the Church of Armenia has invited the faithful to sing and
exalt with love in our assembly. Let us bless with hymns of
praise the divinely inspired Gregory who is adorned with the
martyr’s crown.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us the faithful praise in songs and hymns the renowned
and superior hierarch of all, Gegory, as a sufferer for the truth,
as a vigilant shepherd and teacher, a lamp and advocate for the
whole world, for he intercedes with Christ to save us.
640

1

October
THE PROTECTION OF THE MOST
HOLY THEOTOKOS.
The Holy Apostle Ananias, one of the Seventy.
Our Venerable Father Romanus the Melodist (496)

Troparion of the Theotokos, Tone 4:
Protected by your appearance, O Theotokos; today, we
devout people solemnly celebrate. Gazing upon your most
pure icon, we fervently say: Protect us with your holy veil,
and deliver us from all evil, imploring your Son, Christ our
God, to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin is present in the Church, and with the
choirs of saints, invisibly prays to God for us. The angels
worship with the hierarchs, the apostles rejoice with the
prophets; because the Theotokos prays for us to the eternal
God.
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Ananias, intercede with the merciful God
that He may grant our souls forgiveness of sins.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
641

Menologion - October

care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
Romanus, your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 2:
With fervent prayers O Intercessor, and asking a speedy
hearing, accept our prayers, O Ananias, and pray to Christ to
have mercy on us, O unique one reposed among the saints.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
You were adorned from childhood with the divine virtues
of the spirit, O all-wise Romanus, you were a precious
adornment of the church of Christ. For you made it lovely
with beautiful hymnody. Therefore, we pray to you: grant
your divine gift to those who desire it, that we may cry out to
you: Rejoice O all-blessed father, beauty of the Church.

2

The Holy Bishop-Martyr Cyprian (258).
The Holy Martyr Justina (258).
The Holy Andrew, Fool for Christ (911).
Troparion of a Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You renounced the magic arts O God-wise one, in order
to learn of God, and you became one of the wisest men on
earth, healing those who venerate you, Cyprian, and Justina.
With her pray to the Master, the Lover of Mankind, to save
our souls.

3

The Holy Bishop-Martyr Dionysius the Areopagite.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You learned goodness and practiced temperance in
642

Menologion - October

all things. You robed yourself in the priesthood and girded
yourself with good conscience. Therefore, you came to draw
ineffable things from the chosen vessel, Paul. Like him, you
have completed the race, you have kept the faith. O bishopmartyr Dionysius, pray Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
In a spiritual way you passed through the gates of heaven,
and you climbed to the third heaven with the Apostle Paul.
You were given an unspeakable understanding of mystical
things with which you have given light to those sitting in
the darkness of ignorance. Therefore, we invoke you, O
Dionysius. Rejoice, O father of all!

4

The Holy Martyr Hierotheus, Bishop of Athens.
Our Venerable Father Francis of Assisi (1226).
Troparion of Hierotheus, Tone 4:
You learned goodness: See above.

Kontakion, Tone 8:
We honor you, O bishop of Athens, for we have learned
marvelous and ineffable mysteries from you. You are an
inspired author of divine hymns. Intercede that we may be
delivered from our sins, O most venerable Hierotheus, so that
we may cry out: Rejoice, O God-wise father.
Or this one, Tone 4:
As an inviolable pillar, O Hierotheus, you were not afraid
of intimidating enemies, but you destroyed the stronghold of
pride. You were like a precious stone, O father, that is why the
Lord crowns you with His Life-Giving and Divine right hand
for your courage. Pray for all of us.
643

Menologion - October

5

The Holy Martyr Charitina (304).
Troparion, Tone 2:
Your lamb Charitina, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

You shamed the violent enemy with the might of your
understanding, O Charitina, after you had strengthened your
soul with faith. O all-blessed lady, you went into the presence
of Christ wearing a gown dyed red in your blood. Now that
you stand in the company of angels, pray for us, O passionbearer.

6

The Holy and Glorious Apostle Thomas.
Troparion, Tone 2:

You were both a disciple of Christ and a member of
the divine apostolic college. Your lack of faith proved the
Resurrection of Christ and your touch unleashed reverence. O
all-praiseworthy Thomas, now obtain peace and mercy for us.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
O Thomas, full of wisdom and grace, you were a disciple
and faithful servant of Christ. You cried out in the sincerity of
your repentance: You are my Lord and my God!

7

The Holy Martyrs Sergius and Bacchus (303).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
644

Menologion - October

Or this, Tone 5:
O long-suffering Sergius and glorious Bacchus, you are
the staunch support of those who are Christ’s passion-bearers.
O eyes of the Church of Christ, enlighten the eyes of our souls.
Now pray to the Lord that we might escape the darkness of
sin, and that we be revealed as partakers of the unsetting Sun
through your prayers, O saints.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Taking arms against the enemy by reason, you destroyed
their guile and you received victory from heaven. With one
heart you all-praiseworthy martyrs sang this hymn: it is a
good and beautiful thing to be with God.

8

Our Venerable Mother Pelagia (457).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O mother the divine image: see page 554.

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having exhausted your body with fasting, with vigilant
prayers you entreated the Creator concerning your deeds, that
you might receive complete remission. You manifestly acquired
this, O mother, having shown us the path of repentance.

9

The Holy Apostle James Alpheus.
Our Venerable Father Andronicus and his Wife
		
Athanasia (4th Century).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle James: see page 548.
645

Menologion - October

Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 1:
You were shown to be a citizen of the desert: see page 565.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 2:
Let us extol James with praises as a herald of God, for he
implanted wise doctrines deeply in pious souls. Now he stands
before the throne of the Master and rejoices in the company of
angels, praying for all of us unceasingly.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
You took the light burden of the Lord on your shoulders
and followed Him, O Andronicus, and hated the worldly
worries and settled in the desert, O blessed one, where you
perfectly performed the discipline of fasting, uniting with
God. That is why we sing to you: pray to Christ God to grant
us forgiveness of our sins, that we may honor your holy
memory with love.

10

The Holy Martyrs Eulampius and Eulampia (302).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551

Kontakion, Tone 3:
Let us honor the wise Eulampius and Eulampia, fearless
martyrs. They were brother and sister in the flesh. Through
the power of the crucified Christ, they put to shame their
persecutors’ guile, and together they became the glory and
praise of martyrs.

11

The Holy Apostle Philip, one of the Seven Deacons.
Our Venerable Father Theophane, the Branded and
Composer of Canons, Bishop of Nicea (847).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 3:
Holy Apostle Philip: see page 548.
646

Menologion - October

Or this, in the same tone:
O Philip, you won apostolic favor and you astonished
all Samaria. Your divinely inspired words gave the eunuch
understanding so that he was baptized and gave glory to God
when he comprehended the Incomprehensible. O holy apostle,
obtain grace and great mercy for us from God.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 4:
Philip conversed with apostles and fished for people. He
was one of the first chosen by the apostles. Today he gives a
wealth of cures to the world and protects from calamity those
who honor him. Therefore, we cry out to him: O Apostle, save
all of us through your prayers.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 2:
You proclaimed the divine Incarnation of Christ, and
you exposed the bodiless enemies, O wonderful Theophane.
Because of this we perseveringly and piously call to you: pray
unceasingly for all of us.
_________________________________________________
On the following Sunday
SUNDAY OF THE MEMORY OF THE FATHERS AT
THE SEVENTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.
Troparion, Tone 8:
O Christ our God, You are above all praise. You have
established our fathers as beacons on the earth, leading us all
to the true faith through them. O most merciful Lord, glory to
You!
647

Menologion - October

Kontakion, Tone 6:
The Son shone forth from the Father indescribably. In two
natures he was born of a woman. Recognizing this, we do
not reject the representation of His human form; rather, we
depict it with reverence and honor it with faith. Therefore, the
Church holds fast to the true faith and kisses the image of the
incarnation of Christ.
_________________________________________________

12

The Holy Martyrs Probus, Tarachus, and Andronicus
(292).
Our Venerable Father Cosmas of the Holy City
[Jerusalem], Bishop of Maiuma, the
Hymnographer (8th Century).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 5:

The angelic powers of heaven were rapt in amazement
at the successful accomplishments of these holy martyrs: for
even in their mortal bodies, they vanquished the bodiless
enemy by the power of the holy cross, and they obtained a
spiritual victory. Therefore, they now intercede with the Lord
that He may have mercy on our souls.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: See page 555.
Or this, Tone 8:
You were an eloquent orator in the church, and a divinely
inspired musician. You were an image of life and a font
of theology, for you soothed all who heard you, our father
Cosmas by your inspired words and beautiful music.
648

Menologion - October

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
The soldiers of Christ, the holy martyrs Probus, Tarachus,
and Andronicus have shown us the glory of the Holy Trinity
by refuting the error of their persecutors and fighting
courageously for the faith.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
You were adorned with virtue, blessed Cosmas, and you
adorned the Church of Christ with wonderful music. Pray to
the Lord for our deliverance from all the snares of enemies,
for we appeal to you, O truly rich father.
The Memory of our holy father, Martin the Merciful,
Bishop of Tours.

13

The Holy Martyrs Carpus, Papylus, and Agathonica (250).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
To those who live on earth, God has granted your bodies
as a precious treasure, a stream from which healing flows,
dispelling all manner of sickness and pouring out divine grace.
Therefore, O divine martyrs Carpus, Papylus, and Agathonica,
we solemnly celebrate your memory today with love.

14

The Holy Martyrs Nazarius, Gervasius, Protasius,
and Celsus (60).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
649

Menologion - October

Or this, in the same tone:
This quartet of martyrs illumines the Church like a
brilliant star in the sky. Through the martyrdom of Nazarius,
and the faith of Gervasius, and with the confession of Celsus
and Protasius, the Church has been made to sing: glory to
God, Who has given strength to the martyrs!
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
Having appeared as bright lamps, O divine martyrs,
you enlightened all creation with the light of your miracles,
releasing from infirmities, ever driving away the deep night,
continually pray to Christ the One God for all of us.
Our Venerable Mother Paraskeva of Trnovo (1201).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You followed closely in the steps of Christ, your Spouse,
loving the silent, desert life. As a young woman you took up
His yoke, and armed yourself against the enemy with the sign
of the cross. By fasting and prayer, by tears and penance,
you utterly quenched the fires of passion. Now you stand
with the wise virgins in Christ’s presence in the heavenly
bridal chamber, and pray for us who honor your memory, O
Paraskeva, worthy of glory.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
Let us all sing of holy Paraskeva, holy intercessor of all who
are in trouble. For she rejected the corruptible and accepted the
incorruptible way of life forever. Therefore, discover the glory,
the grace of wonders, by the command of God.

650

Menologion - October

15

Our Venerable Father Euthymius the Younger (9th
Century).
The Venerable Martyr Lucian, Priest of the Great
Church of Antioch (312).

Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Troparion of Lucian, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Or this, in the same tone:
You kept yourself chaste by your fasting, O priest-martyr
Lucian, O pride of Antioch; intercede with Christ God for us
who keep your holy memory.
Kontakion of Euthymius, Tone 2:
You walked through storms without getting wet, and with
the arrows of your tears you slew the bodiless enemy. You
received the grace to work miracles, O wise in God venerable
Euthymius, and you heal all our passions. Pray without
ceasing for us all.
Kontakion of Lucian, Tone 2:
We honor you with hymns of glory, O Lucian, the most
radiant star. You first became illustrious by your detachment
from the things of this world, then were lifted up by your
struggle. Do not cease to intercede for all of us.

16

The Holy Martyr Longinus the Centurion.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
651

Menologion - October

Kontakion, Tone 4:
The Church greatly rejoices today in commemorating the
courageous, ever-memorable Longinus, and it cries out, “O
Christ, You are my strength and my stronghold.”

17

The Holy Prophet Hosea.
The Holy Venerable Martyr Andrew of Crete (767).
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory of Your prophet Hosea:
See page 548.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 4:

Trained in asceticism on the mountain, you were able to
defeat the devil’s assaults by the power of the cross, O allblessed one. With great courage, you faced the battle and
crushed Emperor Copronymus with the sword of faith. O
glorious venerable martyr Andrew, God crowned you for your
asceticism and your good fight.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
With sure steps, you followed the commands of the Lord,
and you were filled with the Holy Spirit, O prophet Hosea.
You received the gift of prophecy, and you spoke daringly to
Israel, who sought a speedy coming of Christ. You converted
those who strayed from the path of justice and set them on
the road to the heavenly Jerusalem. Now you stand within that
city and implore the Lord, praying without ceasing for all of us.
Kontakion of the Venerable-Martyr, Tone 3:
Today Constantinople, Capital of the Byzantine Empire,
celebrates the brightest feast of your light-bearing memory
652

Menologion - October

and calls all cities and countries to participate. It rejoices in
that it holds a great treasure: your body which sustained so
many struggles, O holy martyr Andrew, light of Orthodoxy!

18

The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle and evangelist Luke: see page 548.
Or this, Tone 5:
Let us praise the holy and glorious Apostle Luke with
sacred chants. He is the radiant writer of the Gospel of Christ
and the scribe of the Acts of the Apostles, for he is a living
doctor who heals human weakness, the ills of souls and the
sickness of nature, and is praying unceasingly for our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us praise the divine Luke, a star of the Church, a true
preacher of piety, and the orator of the ineffable mysteries.
The Word Who searches all hearts chose him and the wise
Paul to be teachers of the Gentiles.

19

The Holy Prophet Joel.
The Holy Martyr Varus (307).
Troparion of Joel, Tone 2:

You knew beforehand of the coming of God in the
flesh and the descent of the Holy Spirit. You announced the
impending judgment, O prophet Joel. Through your prayers,
save those who venerate you from all sorrow.
653

Menologion - October

Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your Martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Or this, in the same tone:
You saw the army of passion-bearers suffer according to
the law, and showing courage, you sought to endure it as well.
You longed to die for Christ, and you received the martyr’s
crown from Him, O Varus. Therefore, pray for the salvation
of our souls.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
O prophet of God, you have been filled with inspiration
from the Comforter; you have explained the enlightenment of
all nations that will happen in the last days. Therefore, today
we piously praise you, fulfill your memory, and sing to you:
pray to Christ God for our souls.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Having followed Christ, O Varus, you drank from His
chalice. You received the crown of martyrdom and exult
forever with the angels. Never cease to intercede before the
Lord for our souls.
Our Venerable Father John of Rila (946).

20

The Holy Great Martyr Artemius (392).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Or this, in the same tone:

Preserved in Christ by true belief, O passion-bearer, you
overcame the tyrant king and his idol offerings. Because you
rebuked that king, the Great King granted you a shining crown
654

Menologion - October

of victory and wondrous miracles of healing with which you
cure all those who have recourse to you: O great Artemius,
pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us worthily praise Artemius in hymns, a devout and
crown-bearing martyr. Having descended upon the enemies of
victory he vanquished them. Greatest among the martyrs and
worker of the richest wonders: Pray to the Lord for all of us.

21

Our Venerable Father Hilarion the Great (372).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Or this, in the same tone:
Like Anthony the Great, you were the strength of monks,
a model for hermits and a wonder-worker through grace. You
are a source of healing for those troubled by the passions. O our
father Hilarion, pray for those who celebrate your holy memory.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
We gather today to praise you in hymns, O brilliant sun,
because you have shone for those who are in the darkness of
ignorance, raising all to divine heights, O Hilarion. Therefore,
we exclaim: rejoice, O father, model of all ascetics.

22

The Holy Bishop Abercius of Hieropolis, Equal to the
Apostles, Wonder-worker (2nd Century).
The Holy Seven Children of Ephesus.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
655

Menologion - October

an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and bishop Abercius, intercede with Christ
our God to save our souls.
Or this, in the same tone:
You became a preacher of truth and a marvelous wonderworker, a father of orphans and a protector of the poor, a brave
shepherd for your rational flock, a scourge to demons. Protect
from all stealthy attack those who cry out to you: O our father
Abercius, pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Or this, in Tone 8:
We praise with hymns the all-blessed youths, preachers
of devotion and models of the resurrection of the dead, seven
pillars of the Church, for incorrupt in sleep for many years
and then raised from sleep, in this way they are announcing to
all the resurrection of the dead.
Kontakion of the Hierarch, Tone 8:
The Church of all the faithful honors you, Abercius, as
the greatest priest and equal to the Apostles. Through your
prayers, O blessed one, keep this Church unconquered,
undisturbed from all heresy, and undefiled, for you are evermemorable.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
You glorified Your saints on earth, O Christ, before
Your second and awesome Coming. By raising the youths
so gloriously, You manifested the resurrection to those who
did not know it. Revealing the flesh and clothing incorrupt,
656

Menologion - October

You moved the emperor to cry aloud, “You are indeed the
Resurrection of the dead!”

23

The Holy Apostle James, the Brother of the
Lord in the flesh.
Troparion, Tone 2:

O Righteous One, you received the Gospel as a disciple
of the Lord. As a martyr, you did not betray it. As a brother
of the Lord, you have confidence before Him. As a hierarch,
intercede for us. Pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
The Word of God, only-begotten of the Father, Who came
to us in the latter days, chose you, divine James, to be the first
shepherd and teacher of Jerusalem, and a faithful steward of
spiritual mysteries. Therefore, O Apostle, we all honor you.

24

The Holy Martyr Arethas and his Companions (523).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 1:

O Lover of Mankind, accept the sufferings which Your
saints endured for You. As we pray, heal all our pains.
Or this, in the same tone:
Opposing the unbelieving king, after the example of
Christ, this holy martyr reproached his lack of faith. He acted
with courage, and suffered torture and death. For this the
657

Menologion - October

angels praise you, O Arethas, and those who suffered with
you. All generations of the faithful bless you for you ever
intercede for our souls.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
The feast of the passion-bearers comes to us today as a
herald of joy. Let us celebrate it and glorify the Lord on high.

25

The Holy Martyrs and Notaries Marcian and 		
Martyrius (355).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs O Lord our God: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 1:

Two martyrs worthy of each other, Marcian with glorious
Martyrius, have crushed the wickedness of Arius, and taught
him to believe in the Son ever of one essence with the Father
and the Holy Spirit, obeying Paul, the teacher of truth. For
this they died under the sword and were united to Christ. They
intercede before Him for the salvation of our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Since childhood you have been good champions, O
Marcian with wise Martyrius. You vanquished the heretic
Arius and preserved the true faith by imitating Paul, the wise
teacher. Therefore, you deserved to be with him in eternal
life, O Defenders of the Holy Trinity.
658

Menologion - October

26

The Holy and Glorious Great-Martyr Demetrius,
whose tomb streams myrrh (305).
The Commemoration of the Great and Fearful
Earthquake at Constantinople (740).
Troparion, Tone 3:

O Passion-bearer, the whole world has seen you as a
defender of those in danger and a conqueror of the nations.
You destroyed the arrogance of Lyaeus by giving Nestor
courage for the struggle in the stadium. Likewise, O holy
Demetrius, pray to Christ God to grant us great mercy.
Troparion of the Earthquake, Tone 8:
O Christ our God, Who look upon the earth, and it quakes:
deliver us from the dreadful threat of earthquakes, and send
down upon us Your rich mercies through the prayers of the
Theotokos and save us.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
With streams of your blood, O Demetrius, the God, Who
gives you invincible might, has dyed the Church in purple,
and keeps your city unharmed, for you are its foundation.
Kontakion of the Earthquake, Tone 6:
Deliver all of us from a powerful earthquake, O Lord, and
from unbearable wounds caused by our sins. O Lord, spare
Your [right-believing rulers and] people whom You have
purchased with Your Blood, O Master; and do not deliver our
cities to destruction by terrible earthquakes, for we do not
honor any other god besides You, O God. Answer those who
cry out to to You: “I am with you and no one can be against
you.”
659

Menologion - October

27

The Holy Martyr Nestor (306).
The Holy Martyr Capitolina and her Servant 		
Erotheïdes (c. 304).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your martyr Nestor, O Lord our God, in his struggle
received an incorruptible crown from You. With Your
strength, he brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly
valor of demons. Through his prayers, O Christ our God, save
our souls.
Or this, Tone 3:
You took up the power of the Divine cross from the great
Demetrius, O glorious one, and you went forth against the
giant. His great strength did not save him, for he was brought
down by you. You were put to death for this, O martyr, and
now have entered into the presence of Christ God. O Nestor,
pray for peace and great mercy for all of us.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Because you fought the good fight, you now inherited
immortal glory; through the prayers of Demetrius the martyr,
you became a perfect soldier of the Master. Therefore, O wise
Nestor, do not cease to intercede together with Demetrius for
all of us.

28

The Holy Martyrs Terence and Neonila.
Our Holy Father Stephen the Sabbaite, 			
Composer of Canons (807).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God, in their struggles received
660

Menologion - October

incorruptible crowns from You. With Your strength, they
brought down the tyrants and broke the cowardly valor of
demons. Through their prayers, O Christ our God, save our
souls.
Troparion of Stephen, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,
luminary for the world, inspired adornment of monks, O
wise Stephen, harp of the Spirit, you enlightened all by your
teachings; intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
The honorable memory of the martyrs comes today, the
most-wise Terence and his wife and children with him, who
are glad in everything. Therefore, let us proceed warmly in
order that we may receive healing. He has received grace from
the Holy Spirit for this: To heal the infirmities and illnesses of
our souls.
Kontakion of Stephen, Tone 4:
You planted a garden of virtues and watered it with your
tears of repentance. Since you have found the Tree of Life, O
all-glorious one, by your intercession save your flock from
perdition and deliver from affliction those who honor you. O
wise Stephen, we have chosen you in faith and love as our
great intercessor.
The Holy Martyr Paraskeva of Iconium
(4th Century).
Troparion of Paraskeva, Tone 4:
Wise and all praised woman-martyr of Christ, Paraskeva,
you received strength and rejected infirmity, conquering the
devil and shaming the torturer, crying out and saying: O come,
cut my body with the sword and burn it with fire, for I go
661

Menologion - October

with rejoicing to my Groom, Christ. Through these prayers, O
Christ God, save our souls.
Kontakion of Paraskeva, Tone 3:
You were offered the all-holy and immaculate torture, for
a payment to the most pure, immortal Groom, Christ. You
gladdened a place in the angelic choir and you conquered the
demonic snares. For this reason we honor you through faith,
O much-suffering woman-martyr Paraskeva.

29

The Holy Venerable Martyr Anastasia (c. 250).
Our Venerable Father Abraham the Hermit (360).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb Anastasia, O Jesus: see page 553.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
In you, O Father Abraham, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 3:

O venerable Anastasia, you were purified by the waters
of virginity and crowned by the blood of your martyrdom.
You grant healing of sickness tro those in need and salvation
to those who have recourse in you from their heart. For this
Christ, the Well-spring of ever-flowing grace, has given
strength to you.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 3:
You were revealed on earth as an angel in the flesh, and
through fasting you flourished like a tree nourished by tghe
waters of abstinence and with the flow of your tears washing
awy stains. Therefoe, O Abraham, you were revealed as a
divine vessel of the Spirit.
662

Menologion - October

The Passing of our Venerable Father Abraham,
Archimandrite and Wonder-worker of Rostov
(11th Century).

30

The Holy Martyr Zenobius and his Sister, Zenobia
(285).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Let us worthily honor with inspired hymns the two martyrs
for truth and preachers of pious devotion, Zenobius and wise
Zenobia, brother and sister who lived and suffered together,
and together received incorruptible crowns of martyrdom.

31

The Holy Apostles Stachys, Amplius, and their
Companions.
The Holy Martyr Epimachus (250).
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy apostles: see page 548.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your Martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Let us properly praise the pure vessels of the All-Holy
Spirit, and glorious rays of the sun, the wise Apostles Amplius,
Urban, Aristobulus, Apelles, Narcissus and Stachys, whom
the grace of our God has joined together.
663

Menologion - October

Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 3:
You were an inspired pillar and a witness to the truth.
You conquered the bodiless foe through bodily torment and
received the crown from Christ. Thus, O blessed one, we cry
out to you: pray unceasingly, O glorious one, to grant us great
mercy.
[The Holy Priest-Martyr Theodore Romzha, 		
Bishop of Mukačevo (1947).]
[Troparion of Blessed Theodore, Tone 4]
[O priest-martyr Theodore, following the apostles’ path
of piety, as a good shepherd guarding Christ’s flock, you
laid down your life. For having been slain by the godless, O
Blessed One, adorned with wounds you entered into eternal
joy, O Long-Suffering One, and received from the Lamb of
God the crown of glory. Pray to Him to save our souls.]
[Kontakion of Blessed Theodore, Tone 3]
[As a blossom thirsting for the sun, so you loved the Sun
of Truth: Christ God. And as a zealous pastor you taught the
Carpathian land piety. You showed profoundest humility by
your life, and like the rock of faith you blocked the way of
godlessness. You accepted the priceless pearl of patience even
to the shedding of your blood. We who venerate you with
profound love now call to you: O priest-martyr Theodore,
pray for the souls of us sinners before the throne of the AllMerciful.]

664

November

1

The Holy Unmercenary Wonder-workers
Cosmas and Damian.
Troparion, Tone 8:

Holy unmercenary healers and wonderworkers, Cosmas
and Damian, treat us in our weakness; freely you received, so
freely give to us.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O glorious physicians and wonderworkers who have
received the grace of healing, you grant health to the afflicted.
By your care, defeat our shameless enemies and give
miraculous healing in the world.

2

The Holy Martyrs Akindynus, Pegasius, Aphthonius,
Elpidiphorus, and Anempodistus (335).
Troparion, Tone 2:

O passion-bearers of the Lord, blessed is the earth that
received your blood, and holy is the place that received
your bodies. You have vanquished the enemy in battle and
proclaimed Christ with courage. We pray to you to intercede
with Him, the Good One, that He may save our souls.
665

Menologion - November

Kontakion, Tone 2:
You received the pious and God-bearing martyrs who
gave up all things on earth—Akindynus, Pegasius, and
Anempodistus, and with them Aphthonius and Elpidiphorus
—into the enjoyment of Your good gifts and repose, O You
Who alone are all-good.

3

The Holy Martyrs Acepsimas, the Bishop; Joseph,
the Priest; and Aeithalas, the Deacon (4th 		
Century).
The Dedication of the Church of the Holy Great 		
Martyr George in Lydia, where his precious body
is entombed.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Troparion of George, Tone 4:
O victorious Great Martyr George, protector of the poor,
liberator of prisoners, physician of the sick, and champion of
kings, intercede with Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
O wise one, you offered the Holy Mysteries sinlessly, and
you became an acceptable sacrifice, O God-blessed one. Since
you gloriously drank from the cup of Christ, holy Acepsimas,
together with your companions who suffered with you, pray
unceasingly for all of us.
666

Menologion - November

Kontakion of George, Tone 8:
We the faithful hasten to the shelter of your certain and
swift protection, and we make this petition to you, O passionbearer of Christ: Deliver from every assault of the enemy and
from dangers and evil those who sing to you, so that we may
cry out to you: Rejoice, O martyr George!

4

Our Venerable Father Joannicus the Great (846).
The Holy Martyr Nicander, Bishop of Myra.
The Priest Hermas.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:

Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom, and
your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundred-fold;
you became a shining torch over the world. O Joannicus, our
father, pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
Or this, Tone 4:
You fought like a brave soldier against the hostile flesh,
and you battled spiritual enemies by deep fasting. You
vanquished legions of devils by humility and in the end have
shown yourself a great conqueror. You received power to
work wonders from God. O venerable Joannicus, now pray to
Him to save our souls.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.

667

Menologion - November

Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
You were revealed as a brilliant star enlightening the
world, and shining on those in the darkness of passions. You
were revealed as the mightiest physician. As you received the
grace of healing, we ask of you the gift of healing, that we
may cry out: Rejoice, O father Joannicus.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
You were enlightened with the anointing of truth, and
you were illumined by the blood of martyrdom. With joy you
have taken up your place among the angels, O glorious ones.
Therefore, we celebrate your precious memory, O holy ones,
praying to obtain purification through your prayers.

5

The Holy Martyrs Galaction and Episteme (253).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.

Kontakion, Tone 2:
O glorious Galaction, you and your honorable wife and
fellow-sufferer, Episteme, were numbered among the martyrs
of Christ because you fought the good fight in radiant ascetical
struggles. Therefore, pray unceasingly to the only God for all
of us.

6

Our Father among the saints, Paul the Confessor,
Archbishop of Constantinople (351).

Troparion, Tone 3:
The Church sees you among her priests as another Paul
because of your confession of the divine faith. The blood of
668

Menologion - November

Abel and Zechariah calls for you to the Lord. O venerable
father, pray to Christ God to grant great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You shone over the earth like a heavenly star, and now
you enlighten the catholic Church. For her sake, you suffered,
shed your blood and made a gift of your soul, O Paul, and like
the blood of Abel and Zechariah, your blood clearly cries out
to the Lord.

7

The Holy Thirty-three Martyrs at Melitene (298).
Our Venerable Father Lazarus, the Wonder-worker,
who fasted at Mount Galesius (11th Century).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God, see page 551.
And of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Your falling tears and prayer vigils watered the pillar,
and your suffering made your labors fruitful a hundredfold.
And you were a shepherd, obtaining forgiveness for all. Our
venerable father Lazarus, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 8:
The radiant choir of martyrs, the light-bearing army,
descends perceptibly to us. Today the Church is enlightened
by wondrous rays. Therefore, we celebrate their honorable
memory, beseeching from You, our Savior: through their
prayers deliver us from distress that we might sing to You:
Alleluia.
669

Menologion - November

Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 4:
The Church of Christ glorifies you with rejoicing psalms,
for you are like the light of the greatest candlestand for her.
Therefore, do not cease praying to Christ to grant the remission
of sins to all.

8

THE SYNAXIS OF THE ARCHANGEL 		
MICHAEL AND ALL THE BODILESS
POWERS OF HEAVEN.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us through your prayers and
to shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Leaders of God’s armies and ministers of divine glory,
commanders of angels and guides of mortals, plead on our
behalf for what we need and for great mercy; since you are the
leaders of the heavenly hosts.

9

Our Venerable Mother Matrona (492).
The Venerable Theoctista of Lesbos (881).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: See page 551.

670

Menologion - November

Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
Matrona, your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 2:
In your love for the Lord you disdained the desire for rest,
O venerable woman. You enlightened your soul by fasting and
with power you conquered beasts; but by your prayers destroy
the pride of our enemies.

10

The Holy Apostles Erastus, Olympas, Rhodion, and
their Companions.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: See page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Your minds were enlightened with light divine. You
destroyed deceptive arguments with true wisdom, and having
fished for all the Gentiles, O glorious apostles, you brought
them to the Master, teaching them to glorify the Divine Trinity.

671

Menologion - November

11

The Holy Martyrs Menas, Victor, and Vincent (304).
The Holy Martyr Stephanus (304).
Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theodore the
Studite (826).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God: See page 551.
Or this, Tone 4:
O Lord, You have made those martyrs who shared in Your
passion ornaments of glory for the world. Therefore, they may
have an invincible victory.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: See page 555.
Kontakion of Menas, Tone 4:
O long-suffering Menas, Christ our God summoned you
from earthly armies, and enrolled you with incorruptible
comrades in heaven, and you were given the incorruptible
crown.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 2:
You undertook the ascetifal effort by your ascetical and
angelic life, and you were revealed as a companion of angels,
O God-blessed Theodore. Together with them do not cease
praying to Christ God for all of us.

672

Menologion - November

12

Our Father among the Saints, John the
Merciful, Patriarch of Alexandria.
Our Venerable Father Nilus.
Troparion of John, Tone 8:

By your patience, you obtained your reward, O venerable
father. You were constant in prayer, and you loved and helped
the poor. Blessed John the Merciful, intercede with Christ
God that He may save our souls.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: See page 667.
Kontakion of John, Tone 2:
O John, most wise, by distributing all your wealth to the
poor, you now received the wealth of heaven. Therefore, we
honor you for the sake of all, celebrating your memory, who
bears the name merciful because of your charity.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
O blessed Nilus, your vigils of prayers cut down the weeds
of bodily passions like a scythe. Since you have confidence
before the Lord, free me from every misfortune so that I may
exclaim to you: Rejoice, universal father.
The Holy Priest-martyr Josaphat, Archbishop of
Polotsk (1623).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You have become a brilliant light, O Priest-Martyr
Josaphat. You gave up your life for your sheep like the Good
Shepherd. You were slain by the lovers of schism, and you
have entered into the Holy of Holies to rest in the company
673

Menologion - November

of the angels. O long-suffering saint, we make this petition to
you: Beg Christ, the Prince of Shepherds, to save our souls
and to number us among the sheep at His right hand.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were enlightened by a spark from the crucified Christ
from the time when you were a child. You were like an angel
in monastic life, living in it with true holiness. You openly
preached unity, and with your martyr’s blood, you calmed the
hearts of those who had been tossed about with schism. Christ
has crowned you and we sing to you: rejoice, unshatterable
pillar of unity.

13

Our Father among the saints, John Chrysostom,
Archbishop of Constantinople (407).
Troparion, Tone 8:

The grace shining forth from your mouth like a torch has
enlightened the universe; it has stored up in the world the
treasure of disdain for wealth. It has shown us the heights of
humility. Instruct us by your words, John Chrysostom, our
father, and intercede with the Word, Christ God, to save our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
You have received divine grace from heaven and with
your lips you teach all how to worship one God in the Trinity,
all-blessed venerable John Chrysostom. It is proper that we
praise you, for you are the teacher who reveals the divine.
674

Menologion - November

14

The Holy and All-praiseworthy Apostle Philip.
Troparion, Tone 3:

The whole world is adorned and Ethiopia sings for joy
at her crown. She received light from you, and is adorned by
your crown. O Philip, speaking in behalf of God, she solemnly
celebrates your memory. You taught everyone to believe in
Christ and you completed the course of the Gospel worthily.
Therefore, Ethiopia has come to lift their hands to God. Pray
to Him to grant us great mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Lord, Your disciple and friend and imitator of Your
passion, Philip, has preached You as God to the universe.
Through his prayers deliver Your Church from her lawless
enemies, and through the Theotokos protect every city, O
Most Merciful Christ.

15

The Holy Martyrs and Confessors Gurias, Samonas,
and Habib (322).

The Fast of the Nativity of Christ begins from here,
and goes until the day of the Nativity of Christ.
Troparion, Tone 5:
You granted us the miracles of Your holy martyrs as an
unshakable stronghold, O Christ God. Through their prayers,
confound the snares of the pagans, strengthen the scepters of
the kingdom for You alone are good and love mankind.
675

Menologion - November

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having received grace from on high O wise ones, you
stood before those tempters, O all-praised ones. Therefore, like
the three holy youths, you were delivered from bitter death, for
in truth you are the glory of Edessa and the joy of the world.

16

The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew.
Troparion, Tone 3:

Earnestly you followed Christ the Master, Who in His
goodness appeared on earth to the human race. He called
you from the tax booth, revealing you as a chosen apostle,
the evangelist of the Gospel to all the world. Therefore, O
Matthew, speaking in behalf of God, we honor your precious
memory. Pray to the merciful God to grant remission of sins
to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
When you renounced the yoke of the publican’s scale
and were united to the yoke of truth, you were revealed to
be a merchant of all-excellence, gathering in the riches of the
wisdom from on high. You were the herald for this cause, the
word of truth, and aroused souls from slothfulness by writing
about the day of judgment.

17

Our Father among the saints, Gregory the Wonderworker, Bishop of Neocaesarea (270).
Troparion, Tone 8:

You became worthy of your name through your way of
life, through vigilant prayers and constant works of mercy.
676

Menologion - November

Therefore, father Gregory, intercede with Christ God that He
may enlighten our minds, lest we go to sleep in sin, which
leads to death.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You received the power to perform many miracles,
frightened the awful demons, and healed the sick through
your signs. All-wise Gregory: Your deeds entitle you to be
called the Wonderworker.

18

The Holy Martyrs Plato and Romanus (303).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Your holy memory delights the universe and brings all
the faithful together in your holy temple. Since we are now
gathered together in our joy, we praise your great deeds with
hymns, O Plato and Romanus, as we cry out to you with faith:
O holy ones, deliver our nation and your city from its enemies.

19

The Holy Prophet Obadiah.
The Holy Martyr Barlaam (304).
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Barlaam, O Lord: see page 550.
677

Menologion - November

Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 1:
Receiving clarity of mind through divine illumination,
the great Obadiah saw the future through the Holy Spirit. We
piously and wisely keep his memory today, and venerate him
to find light for our hearts.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
You were revealed as a powerful fortress, for you offered
a burnt-offering of yourself to Christ as an acceptable incense
offering. You received a crown of honor, O Barlaam. Always
pray for us, O sufferer.

20

Pre-festive Day of the Entrance in the temple of the
most holy Theotokos.
Our Venerable Father Gregory the Decapolite 		
(9th Century).
Our Father among the saints, Proclus, Archbishop
of Constantinople (446).
Troparion of the saints, Tone 4:

God of our fathers, You always deal with us in Your
kindness. Take not Your mercy away from us; but through
their prayers guide our life in peace.
Troparion of the Prefeast,
in the same tone [4]:
Today Anna prepares for us a joy that dispels all sadness
for she has blossomed and borne the only Ever-Virgin. Today
she fulfills her vows with gladness and leads into the Temple
of the Lord the one who is the true temple of God the Word
and His pure Mother.
678

Menologion - November

Kontakion of Gregory, Tone 3:
The Church recognizes you as a brilliant sun which
enlightens the world with virtues and with miracles of healing.
You pleased Christ, therefore, we celebrate your precious
memory and honor your struggles, O Gregory, our father wise
and all-blessed.
Kontakion of Proclus, Tone 4:
Today the most honorable of cities truly celebrates your
honorable repose, O father of fathers Proclus the wise!
Kontakion of the Prefeast, in the same tone:
Filled with joy today by the auspicious feast of the
Theotokos, the whole world cries out: this is the Heavenly
Ark.

21

THE ENTRANCE OF OUR MOST HOLY
LADY, THE THEOTOKOS AND EVERVIRGIN MARY INTO THE TEMPLE.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Today is the prelude of God’s benevolence and the herald
of our salvation; for the Virgin openly appears in the temple
of God and foretells Christ to all. Let us also with full voice
exclaim to her: rejoice, fulfillment of the Creator’s plan.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
The most pure Temple of the Savior, the most precious
Bridal Chamber and Virgin, the Treasury of the glory of God,
679

Menologion - November

is led today into the house of the Lord, bringing grace in the
Spirit of God. God’s angels praise her in song; she is the
Heavenly Ark.

22

The Holy Apostle Philemon and his Companions.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

We praise the apostles of Christ as stars who bathe the
ends of the world with light: the glorious Philemon and the
consecrated Archippus and Onesimus and Mark and Apollos,
and with them the all-wise Apphia, singing: Pray unceasingly
for all of us.

23

Our Fathers among the saints, Amphilochius,
Bishop of Iconium (395) and Gregory, Bishop of
Agrigento (7th Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers, see page 549.
Kontakion of Amphilochius, Tone 2:

Divine thunder, trumpet of the Spirit, sower of faith, and
axe that cuts down heresies, servant of the Trinity, O great
hierarch Amphilochius, pleasing to the Trinity, you stand
forever with the angels. Pray unceasingly for all of us.
Kontakion of Gregory, Tone 4:
The Church of the Holy Spirit leads righteously with
680

Menologion - November

bright rays of light the fulfilment of your dormition, O allblessed venerable father Gregory.

24

The Holy Great Martyr Catherine (310).
The Holy Great Martyr Mercury (c. 255).
Troparion of the Woman Saint, Tone 4:

You enlightened pagan philosophers with the light of
your works. You were like a full moon for those who travel
at night. You overcame the darkness and converted the queen.
You stood up to the torturer, O blessed Catherine, chosen
by God. On your wishes you were carried to the heavenly
bridal chamber of your splendid Bridegroom Christ. You
were espoused to him with a regal crown, O bride chosen by
God. In the company of the angels, pray for us who keep your
memory.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord: see page 550.
Or this one, in the same tone:
O martyr Mercury, you were led to the struggle of your
martyrdom like a true soldier standing before the Immortal
King. You have gone confidently and were welcomed into
the ranks of the passion-bearers. Hasten to give help to the
faithful who hold fast to your memory.
Kontakion of the Woman Saint, Tone 2:
Let us who love the divine martyrs now raise up an
honorable choir honoring the all-wise Catherine. For this she
681

Menologion - November

preached Christ in the arena, and trampled down the serpents,
despising the wisdom of the long-winded orators.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Let us praise and bless Mercury in song. He is an invincible
warrior in battle and a sure defender in trouble. He delivers
from all danger and tribulation those who venerate him.

25

Our Holy Fathers and Martyrs Clement, Pope of
Rome (101) and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria (311).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Divine and unshakeable towers, divine, strong pillars of
true piety, O all-acclaimed Clement and Peter, through your
prayers preserve us.
On this day is the leave-taking of the Feast of the
Entrance of the Most Holy Theotokos.
If this day falls on Sunday, omit the service of Saint
Peter, and the feast of Saint Clement is sung with the
leave-taking of the feast.
Troparion of Clement, Tone 4:
As the all-glorious wonders of God are marveled by the
whole world to the ends of the earth, O suffering hierarch:  
Beyond the essence of the sea, you sustained the waters against
those who worked division. In your honorable memory, they
682

Menologion - November

always fervently flow into the church given you by God, and
like the sea with one current going among all the nations,
by the miracles through your relics, you created wonders. O
Clement most wonderful, pray to Christ God to save our souls
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were revealed a divine vine through the dedicated
deeds of all its branches, through the drops of sweetness of
wisdom, through your prayers, O all-honorable one, that
covers you with purple, the thoughtful hymn we offer Saint
Clement: Save your servants.

26

Our Venerable Father Alypius the Stylite (640).
Troparion, Tone 1:

You became a column of endurance and rivaled the
forefathers, O venerable one, becoming like Job in your
sufferings and like Joseph in your trials, and like the bodiless
angels though you lived in the flesh. O Alypius our father,
intercede with Christ God that He may save our souls.
Or this, in Tone 4:
You seem a terror unscalable to the devils, crippling
them by the club of your effective prayers. You chase away
passions by fasting. You are a firm support of those wavering.
O venerable father Alypius, beg Christ God for the salvation
of our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
The Church glorifies you and sings to you today, O
Alypius, as a foundation of virtue and pride of the ascetics.
Through your prayers, as the namesake of freedom, grant
683

Menologion - November

all those who praise your virtue and honor your struggle and
deeds deliverance from fierce transgressions.
The Commemoration of the Consecration of the
Church of the Holy Great Martyr George in
Kiev before the gates of Holy Wisdom Cathedral.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Today the ends of the world bless you when you were
filled with divine miracles, and the earth rejoices receiving
your blood. The Christ-named people of the city of Kiev
rejoice with joy by the consecration of your divine temple,
O passion-bearer George, O chosen vessel of the Holy Spirit,
who is the pleaser of Christ. Pray to Him for those who enter
your temple with faith and petitions, to grant cleansing of
sins, peace to the world, and to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having assembled in faith in the consecrated temple
which God alone blessed to construction in your name, let
us praise the divine crown-bearer and great-martyr of Christ,
George, for you are one who reposes among the saints.

27

The Holy Martyr James the Persian (400).
Our Venerable Father Palladius (c. 600).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:

You astonished everyone by enduring horrible torture with
great patience, O long-suffering one. As the evil assembly
performed the slaughter, you uttered prayers of thanksgiving
to the Lord. Through your suffering you received your crown,
and went up to the throne of the heavenly King, Christ God. O
James, pray to Him to save our souls.
684

Menologion - November

Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 2:
You believed your good wife, O patient guide, and
were awed by the dread judgment of God. You despised
the commands and threats of the Persians, O James, and as
they cut your body as though a vine, you were revealed an
honorable martyr.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 1:
You gained God by prayer and fasting, by living a Goddirected monastic life. You were a pure offering to the Holy
Spirit and a shining example of virtuous deeds to the faithful.
You enlighten all who look to you, and so we are led to
sing: glory to Christ Who exalted you! Glory to Him Who
strengthened you! Glory to Him Who heals all through you!

28

The Holy Venerable Martyr Stephen the Younger
(767).
The Holy Martyr Irenarchus (4th Century).
Troparion of Stephen, Tone 4:

Struggling with fasting upon the mountain, you destroyed
the hoards of the spiritual enemy with the weapon of the cross.
O most blessed one, and manfully armed yourself again for
martyrdom, slaying Copronymus with the sword of the Faith.
For both, you have been crowned by God, O ever-memorable
venerable martyr Stephen.

685

Menologion - November

Or this, Tone 3:
At first you were radiant with the light of fasting, but now
you are more brilliant with your martyr’s blood. You burnt off
the fog of those who spoke heresy, and showed the true glory
of the true faith. You have been glorified as a divine witness
to Christ, O holy martyr Stephen.
Troparion of Irenarchus, Tone 4:
Your martyr O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of Stephen, Tone 8:
O lovers of feasts, in our hearts let us faithfully praise in
hymns the divine Stephen, servant of the Holy Trinity, for he
has honored the beautiful icons of the Master and His Mother.
Together now, let us who rejoice lovingly sing to him: rejoice,
O ever-glorious father.
Kontakion of Irenarchus, Tone 1:
May you have an abundance of peace, O martyr, for you
laid hold of the enemy. You defeated that army of spiritual
deception by the power of divine grace. You endured the most
terrible sufferings. Now we beseech you to deliver from all
harm those who keep your memory, O Irenarchus.

29

The Holy Martyr Paramon (250).
The Holy Martyr Philemon.
Our Venerable Father Acacius, mentioned in “The
Ladder.”
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
686

Menologion - November

Kontakion of Paramon, Tone 4:
You washed your soul clean from all impurity by
following the divine mandates. This is how you endured
your martyrdom. You refused to offer sacrifice to any idols;
therefore, they pierced you with a spear. This is how you
followed Christ. O all-blessed Paramon, pray for the world.

30

The Holy and Glorious Apostle Andrew the
First-called.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Andrew, as the first-called of the apostles and brother
of Peter their leader, pray to the Master of All that He grant
peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us praise Andrew the theologian, the namesake of
courage, and first apostle, and follower of his brother Peter,
their leader. For, as he called him in times of old, so now
he calls us: come, we have found the One Whom the world
desires.

687

Menologion - November

688

1

December
The Holy Prophet Nahum.
If it is not Alleluia, Troparion, Tone 2:

As we celebrate the memory of Your prophet Nahum, O
Lord, we implore You to save our souls through his prayers.
Another Troparion, Tone 8:
By the radiance of the life-creating Trinity and the
enlightenment of the Spirit, the God-directed prophet Nahum
warned the idolatrous Ninevites of impending doom. You
reaped the reward in martyrdom. But now you rejoice in
heaven with the angelic choirs, standing in the presence of
the Triple Splendor, yet because you have the confidence of a
prophet, pray for us who always honor your memory.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Your pure heart was enlightened by the Spirit and became
a vessel of radiant prophecy. Because you saw as present the
events yet to come we honor you, O blessed and glorious
Prophet Nahum.

2

The Holy Prophet Habakkuk.
Troparion, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
689

Menologion - December

Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Habakkuk speaking in behalf of God, you announced
to the whole world the coming of God from the south and
from a virgin. Standing on the divine watch, you received a
message from a radiant angel: you announced the resurrection
of Christ to the world. Therefore, we cry out to you: rejoice,
radiant goodness of prophets.

3

The Holy Prophet Zephaniah.
Troparion, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

The Divine Spirit revealed you as shining brightly, O
prophet Zephaniah, for you proclaimed the coming of God.
Rejoice, therefore, O Daughter of Zion. Profess Him, O
Jerusalem. Behold, your King, bearing salvation.

4

The Holy Great Martyr Barbara (306).
Our Venerable Father John of Damascus (749).
Troparion of the Woman Saint, Tone 8:

Let us honor the holy Barbara, all-honorable. Like a bird
she was delivered from the snares of the enemy, and destroyed
them with the help and defense of the cross.

690

Menologion - December

Another Troparion, Tone 4:
O all-blessed Lamb, you were divinely enlightened by
the light of the triple Sun of the Holy Trinity, and you were
confirmed in baptism, in the attraction of the homeland. You
confessed the faith of Christ; therefore, O honorable Barbara,
you were given the blessing from on high, healing sickness
and all diseases. Through her prayers, O Christ our God, save
our souls.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,
luminary for the world, inspired adornment of monks, O wise
John, harp of the Spirit, you enlightened all by your teachings;
intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion of the Woman Saint, Tone 4:
You piously followed God hymning the Holy Trinity, O
Martyred One, You renounced the multitude of idols. You
were not frightened by the threats of your torturers, O Longsuffering Barbara. In the midst of your ascetic efforts, you
ever bravely cried out: I honor the Trinity as One Divinity.
Kontakion of the Venerable, in the same tone:
Let us praise John, the composer of hymns and honorable
spokesman of God, the teacher and instructor of the church,
the antagonist of enemies: for he took up the weapon, the
cross of the Lord, and overcame the temptation of heresy, and
stands as a fervent intercessor before God, so that He would
grant remission of sins to all.

691

Menologion - December

5

Our Venerable and God-bearing Father Sabbas
the Sanctified (532).

Troparion, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom, and
your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundred-fold; you
became a shining torch over the world. O Sabbas our father,
pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
You were offered up by your virtues, becoming a Gardener
of Piety, being a chaste offering to God from your youth,
O Blessed Sabbas. Therefore, you were the enrichment of
monastics, and a praiseworthy citizen of the desert. Therefore,
we cry out to you: rejoice, truly wealthy Sabbas.

6

OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS
NICHOLAS THE WONDER-WORKER,
ARCHBISHOP OF MYRA IN LYCIA (343).

Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and archbishop Nicholas, intercede with
Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
You were renowned as a priest in Myra, O holy Nicholas;
for you fulfilled the Gospel of Christ, O venerable father. You
risked your life for your people and saved the innocent from
death. Thereby you have been initiated into the mysteries of
the grace of God.
692

Menologion - December

7

[Pre-festive Day of the Maternity.]
Our Father among the saints Ambrose,
Bishop of Milan (397).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your life has shown you to your flock as a rule of faith,
an image of gentleness, and a teacher of moderation. You
acquired greatness through humility and wealth through
poverty. O father and archbishop Ambrose, intercede with
Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Shining with divine teachings, you darkened the delusion
of Arius, O Priest of the Mysteries and Shepherd, Ambrose.
Working wonders by the power of the Spirit, you worked
wonders and healed diverse passions. O father and archbishop,
pray to Christ God for the salvation of our souls.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Today the beginning of our salvation is conceived in a
barren womb; and Anna rejoices with Joachim, Adam rejoices
to be freed, and with them, we also begin our hymn: rejoice, O
woman full of grace, the Lord is with you.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, is born from a
barren womb according to the divine plan. She is the inviolate
bridal chamber of the heavenly Bridegroom. The chariot of
the Word is ready, for this is why she was preordained to be
the gateway of God and truly the Mother of Life.
693

Menologion - December

8

THE CONCEPTION OF THE HOLY ANNA
WHEN SHE CONCEIVED THE MOST
HOLY THEOTOKOS.

Troparion, Tone 4:
Today the bonds of barrenness are loosed, for God has
heard the prayers of Joachim and Anna. He promised, beyond
hope, the birth of their godly daughter. The Indescribable,
Himself, born of her as a mortal, commanded us through the
angel to sing to her: rejoice, O woman full of grace, the Lord
is with you.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Today the whole world celebrates how Anna became a
mother by the power of God. She conceived the woman whose
conception of the Word is beyond our words.

9

Our Venerable Father Patapius (7th Century).
Troparion, Tone 8:

In you, O father, the divine image was strictly preserved;
taking up your cross, you followed Christ. You taught us by
example how to spurn the flesh, for it passes away, and how to
care for the soul, which is immortal. Therefore, O venerable
Patapius, your soul rejoices with the angels.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
The people who come to your temple with reverence, O
Holy One, as a place of spiritual healing, ask to receive healing
of their infirmities and forgiveness of sins which they have
committed in their lives. For you are revealed, O venerable
Patapius, as an intercessor for all in need.
694

Menologion - December

10

The Holy Martyrs Menas, Hermogenes, and 		
Eugraphus (4th Century).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Having mortified the fiery visions and movements of the
passions by abstinence, the martyrs of Christ received grace to
dispel the ailments of the infirm, and to live even after death
to work wonders. O truly most glorious wonder, that naked
bones pour forth healing. Glory to the One God and Creator.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Let us all honor with sweet singing Menas the wonderful,
Hermogenes the divine, and Eugraphus dedicated together,
for they honored the Lord and suffered honorably for Him,
and are worthy to be numbered with the bodiless choir in
heaven; and they are bountiful wonders.

11

Our Venerable Father Spiridon the Wonder-		
worker, Bishop of Tremithus (348).
Our Venerable Father Daniel the Stylite (489).

[In the traditional menologion, this day is the commemoration
of Saint Daniel the Stylite. Saint Spiridon the Wonder-worker
is commemorated on December 12.]
Troparion, Tone 1:
You became a column of endurance and rivaled the
forefathers, O venerable one, becoming like Job in your
sufferings and like Joseph in your trials, and like the bodiless
695

Menologion - December

angels though you lived in the flesh. O Daniel our father,
intercede with Christ God that He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Having ascended the pillar like a radiant star, O blessed
One, you illumined the world with your venerable deeds,
and dispelled the darkness of deception, O Father. Therefore,
we pray you: shine forth even now the never setting light of
understanding into the hearts of your servants.
Troparion of the Wonder-worker, Tone 1:
You were revealed as a champion of the First Council, and
a wonderworker, our God-bearing father Spiridon; for you
called out to the woman dead in the tomb and you transformed
the serpent into gold. And when you sang your holy prayers,
you had angels serving with you, O most holy one. Glory to
Him Who gave you strength. Glory to Him Who granted a
crown to you! Glory to Him Who through you grants healing
to all.
Kontakion of the Wonder-worker, Tone 2:
O all-holy father, enraptured by the love of Christ, you
soared on the wings of the Spirit to pure contemplation which
inspired your apostolic life, and you became an altar of
sacrifice, beseeching the Lord that He may enlighten all of us.
_________________________________________________

Sunday of the Forefathers
Troparion of the Resurrection.
Troparion of the Forefathers, Tone 8:
By faith, You, O Christ, justified the forefathers. Through
them You betrothed Yourself to a Church from all nations.
696

Menologion - December

The saints rejoice in Glory because a glorious offspring has
blossomed from their seed: the Mother who bore You without
seed. Through their prayers, O Christ our God, have mercy
on us.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
You did not worship a man-made image O thrice-blessed
youths. You armed yourselves with uncreated divinity. You
were glorified in the trial by fire. Withstanding the flames, you
stood and called out: Hasten, O compassionate God, and hurry
to help us in Your mercy. For You can do whatever You will.
_________________________________________________

12

The Theotokos of Guadalupe (1531).

[Pope St. John Paul II named Our Lady of Guadalupe the
Patroness of the Americas. Outside the western hemisphere
the traditional menologion is observed.]

[Troparion, Tone 4:]
[When you appeared in the New World, O Theotokos, you
fixed your image on Juan Diego’s rose-laden tilma. All the
poor, hungry, and oppressed seek you, Lady of Guadalupe.
We gaze upon your miraculous icon and find hope, crying out
to your Son concealed in your womb: hear our plea for justice,
O most merciful Lord.]
[Kontakion, Tone 7:]
[No longer shall the New World lie wounded in useless
blood sacrifice, for she who is clothed with the sun has
697

Menologion - December

revealed the Son to us. O Mother of the Americas, imprint His
Name upon our hearts, just as you wove your image into the
cactus cloth. Teach your children to cry out: O Christ God, our
hope, glory to You!]

13

The Holy Martyrs Eustratius, Auxentius, Eugene,
Mardarius, and Orestes.
The Holy Martyr Lucy, the Virgin.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion of Eustratius, Tone 2:
You revealed the candlestick shining in darkness to those
sitting in unbelief, O Passion-bearer. For with faith like a
spear you fearlessly besieged the wandering enemies for you
are an eloquent orator.

14

The Holy Martyrs Thrysus, Leucas, Philemon, 		
Appolonius, and Callinicus (2nd Century).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You showed the violence of the enemy in public after you
spat upon the barbarian torturer. You upheld the holiness of
the faith, finding your strength in the help of Christ. Now pray
for us, all you martyrs.
698

Menologion - December

15

The Holy Priest-martyr Eleutherius (120).
Our Venerable Father Paul of Latra (950).
Troparion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life and succeeded to
their throne, divinely inspired bishop. You found access to
contemplation in the active life. Therefore, you rightly taught
the word of truth and struggled for the faith to the shedding
of your blood. O Priest-Martyr Eleutherius, pray to Christ our
God to save our souls.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, in the same Tone:
You were numbered among the monks and a companion
of angels, and so we raise this song to you, O glorious Paul.
Pray that we may find mercy for our souls.
Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 2:
As an inspiration to priests, venerable father, and as one
who reenacted the Passion, we come with petitions and praise
to you. O Priest-Martyr Eleutherius: deliver us from trouble
of any kind. As we approach with love to keep your memory,
pray without ceasing for all of us.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
You acted maturely from your childhood and spurned the
goods of the world. You became a temple of the Trinity in
your quest for the divine life. You enlighten those who come
to you. And so we sing: rejoice, generous father Paul.
Our Father among the saints Stephen the
Confessor, Archbishop of Surozh (c. 775).
699

Menologion - December

16

The Holy Prophet Haggai.
Troparion, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Or this, Tone 1:

Your eyes were opened to pure spiritual reality that is
all from God which you prophesied and understood, O allpraised prophet, guide of peaceful repentance. Therefore we
celebrate your holy memory, and we pray you, to intercede
especially with your prayers to God, O Haggai.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Your mind was enlightened with the fire of the Spirit; you
proclaimed the mysteries of God, O prophet. You revealed
what was to come, pointing to the mysteries of what was to
happen. Pray Christ God to have mercy on us.

17

The Holy Prophet Daniel and the Three Holy 		
Children, Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael.
Troparion, Tone 2:

Great are the accomplishments of faith: the three holy
youths rejoiced in the streams of fire as if in refreshing waters;
and Daniel the prophet shepherded lions like sheep. Through
their prayers, O Christ our God, save our souls.

700

Menologion - December

Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 3:
Your pure heart was enlightened by the Holy Spirit so that
it could become an instrument of prophecy; you perceived
distant events as if they were present. When you were thrown
into the pit, you stopped the lions’ mouths. Therefore, we
honor you, O blessed and glorious prophet Daniel.
Kontakion of the Children, Tone 6:
You did not worship a man-made image, O thrice-blessed
youths. You armed yourselves with uncreated divinity. You
were glorified in the trial by fire. Withstanding the flames, you
stood and called out: hasten, O compassionate God, and hurry
to help us in Your mercy. For You can do whatever You will.

18

The Holy Martyr Sebastian and his Companions (287).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

O Sebastian, by the shedding of your blood you were
clothed in martyrdom, being arrayed in a robe of precious
purple. Therefore, you took up your abode with Christ in the
kingdom without end on high, and you received the crown of
glory with those who suffered with you. O wise Sebastian, as
you sing with them, always remember us.

701

Menologion - December

_________________________________________________
Sunday before the Nativity
Sunday of the Ancestors
Troparion of the Resurrection, and of the Fathers,
Tone 2:
Great are the accomplishments of faith: the three holy
youths rejoiced in the streams of fire as if in refreshing waters;
and Daniel the prophet shepherded lions like sheep. Through
their prayers, O Christ our God, save our souls.
At the Sixth Ode if it is before the date of the 20th.
Kontakion of the Fathers, Tone 6:
You did not worship a man-made image, O thrice-blessed
youths. You armed yourselves with uncreated divinity. You
were glorified in the trial by fire. Withstanding the flames, you
stood and called out: hasten, O compassionate God, and hurry
to help us in Your mercy. For You can do whatever You will.
If it is already the prefestive,
Kontakion of the Pre-feast, Tone 1:
Rejoice Bethlehem, prepare, Ephrata! Behold, the Lamb,
the Great Shepherd is coming forth from the immaculate
womb. The holy ancestors rejoice at seeing Him, and the
shepherds sing to the Virgin who nurses Him.
_________________________________________________

702

Menologion - December

19

The Holy Martyr Boniface (290).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

O crown-bearer and most wise Boniface, you offered
yourself as a willing, immaculate sacrifice to the One Who
was born of a Virgin for our sake.

20

Pre-festive Day of the Nativity in the flesh
of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ.
The Holy Priest-martyr Ignatius the God-bearer
(107).
Troparion of the Prefestive, Tone 4:

Bethlehem, make ready, Eden has been opened for all.
Ephrathah, prepare yourself, for the Tree of Life has blossomed
from the Virgin in the cave. Her womb has become a spiritual
paradise in which divinity was planted. If we partake of it, we
shall live and not die like Adam. Christ is born to raise up the
likeness that had fallen.
Troparion of Ignatius, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life and succeeded to
their throne, divinely inspired bishop. You found access to
contemplation in the active life. Therefore, you rightly taught
the word of truth and struggled for the faith to the shedding of
your blood. O Priest-martyr Ignatius, pray to Christ our God
to save our souls.
703

Menologion - December

Or this, in the same tone:
You followed the apostles’ way of life and succeeded
to their throne, you ascended to the vision of contemplation
through your deeds, O God-bearer, facing savage beasts, fire,
and sword for the sake of the Word of truth, and made the
course of truth straight even at the price of your own blood.
O priest-martyr Ignatius, pray to Christ God for the salvation
of our souls.
Kontakion of the Prefestive, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin is coming to the cave to give birth to the
eternal Word in a manner beyond expression. Let the world
dance when it hears the news; with the angels and shepherds
glorify the eternal God Who chose to appear as a newborn
child.
Kontakion of Ignatius, in the same tone:
The light-bearing day of your radiant ascetic fight
proclaims beforehand to all the One Who was born in a cave.
For thirsting lovingly to delight in Him, you hastened to be
devoured by wild beasts. For this you were called God-bearer,
O all-wise Ignatius.

21

The Holy Martyr Juliana [of Nicomedia] (304).
Troparion of the Prefestive.
And of the Woman Martyr, Tone 4:

Your lamb Juliana, O Jesus, cries out in a loud voice: I
love You, my Bridegroom; I seek You with painful longing; I
704

Menologion - December

am crucified with You; in Your baptism, I am buried with You;
I suffer for You that I may reign with You; and I die for You
that I may live with You. Receive me as a spotless sacrifice
immolated with love for You. By her prayers, O merciful One,
save our souls.
Kontakion of the Woman Martyr, Tone 3:
O virgin, made most pure with the goodness of virginity,
and now, having been crowned with the martyr’s crown, you
grant healing and salvation to those in need who approach
your shrine for Christ pours forth divine grace and eternal life.
Kontakion of the Prefestive, Tone 2:
As we see the One Who holds the world in his hands now
wrapped in swaddling clothes in Bethlehem, let us offer our
hymns in anticipation to the one who gave him birth; for with
a mother’s joy she cradles the Son of God.

22

The Holy Great Martyr Anastasia (304).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb, O Lord: see page 553.
Or this, in the same tone:

How truthfully named are you for the Resurrection, O
martyr of Christ. By enduring suffering you gained victory
over the enemy for the sake of Christ your Bridegroom. Pray
to Him to save our souls.

705

Menologion - December

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Those in temptations and afflictions hasten to your church,
and receive honorable gifts of divine grace dwelling in you, O
Anastasia, for you ever pour out healing on the world.

23

The Holy Ten Martyrs of Crete (250).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 3:

We honor Crete of many wonders from which these
precious flowers have shone forth, pearls of Christ and
offspring of martyrs. Although these blessed only numbered
ten, they overcame the idolatrous nation. Therefore, these
brave souls were given crowns.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
The noble struggle of the martyrs shines forth like the
morning star and sheds brilliant light for us on the One Who
was born in a cave, to whom the Virgin has given birth without
human seed.

706

Menologion - December

24

The Holy Great Martyr Eugenia (262).
Troparion of the Prefestive, Tone 4:

At that time, Mary registered in Bethlehem with the elder
Joseph who was of the house of David. She had conceived
without seed and was with child, and her time to give birth had
come. They found no room in the inn, but the cave became a
pleasant palace for the Queen. Christ is born to raise up the
likeness that had fallen.
Troparion of Eugenia, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Kontakion of the Prefestive, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin is coming to the cave to give birth to the
eternal Word in a manner beyond expression. Let the world
dance when it hears the news; with the angels and shepherds
glorify the eternal God Who chose to appear as a newborn
child.
Kontakion of Eugenia, Tone 4:
You left the passing glory of the world to follow Christ,
and you kept immaculate the brilliance of your soul: O Godwise martyr, all-praised Eugenia.

707

Menologion - December

25

THE NATIVITY IN THE FLESH OF OUR
LORD GOD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your birth, O Christ our God, has shed upon the world
the light of knowledge; for through it, those who worshiped
the stars have learned from a star to worship You, the Sun of
Justice, and to know You, the Dawn from on High. Glory to
You, O Lord!
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today the Virgin gives birth to the Transcendent One; and
the earth offers a cave to the Unapproachable. The angels sing
his glory with the shepherds; the wise men journey with the
star. The eternal God is born for us as an infant child.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation was born
in a cave in Bethlehem of Judea and lay in a manger, have
mercy on us and save us through the prayers of His most pure
Mother; and of our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and
through the prayers of all the saints; for Christ is good and
loves mankind.

708

Menologion - December

26

THE SYNAXIS OF THE MOST HOLY
THEOTOKOS.
And the Commemoration of the Priest-martyr
Euthymius, Bishop of Sardis (824).
Troparion of the Feast, Tone 4:

Your birth, O Christ our God:
Kontakion, Tone 6:
Before the morning star, He was born of the Father
without a mother; today, on earth, He has become man from
you without a father. A star announces the good news to the
Wise Men. The angels join with the shepherds to sing the
glory of your marvelous childbearing, O Woman full of grace.
________________________________________________
Sunday after the Nativity
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY
AND RIGHTEOUS JOSEPH THE
BETROTHED, DAVID THE KING, AND
JAMES THE BROTHER OF GOD.
Troparion, Tone 2:
Joseph, proclaim the wonders you have seen to David, the
forefather of God: the Virgin has given birth; you have given
glory with the shepherds and worshiped with the wise men;
you have been instructed by the angel. Ask Christ our God to
save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today the godly David is filled with joy; Joseph offers
hymns of praise with James. Rejoicing, they take up the
garland of relationship with Christ. They sing praise to Him
709

Menologion - December

Whose birth on earth defies description and they cry out: O
merciful Lord, save those who honor You.
_________________________________________________

27

THE HOLY APOSTLE, FIRST MARTYR,
AND ARCHDEACON STEPHEN.
Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theodore
the Branded, Brother of Theophane the
Composer of Canons (845).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 4:

First martyr and Apostle of Christ, you fought the good
fight. You convicted the tyrants of their wickedness. When you
were killed by stoning at the hands of sinners, you received
a crown from God’s right hand while you cried out: Lord, do
not hold this sin against them.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 2:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 3:
Yesterday, in human flesh the Master came to us; today,
from the flesh, His servant departs. Yesterday, the King was
born in the flesh; today, His servant is killed by stoning. Thus,
the holy Stephen, the first martyr, is brought to perfection.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, in the same tone:
Your mouth spoke bravely, and you shamed the haughty
torturer by your great wisdom through suffering tortures: you
were grievously wounded on your face for the sake of the allhonorable icon of Christ which you taught us always to honor
and venerate. O Theodore, obtain great mercy for us.
710

Menologion - December

28

The Holy Twenty-thousand Martyrs burned at
Nicomedia (302).
Troparion, Tone 2:

O passion-bearers of the Lord, blessed is the earth that
received your blood, and holy is the place that received
your bodies. You have vanquished the enemy in battle and
proclaimed Christ with courage. We pray to you to intercede
with Him, the Good One, that He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O saints made steadfast in soul by faith, twenty thousand
accepted suffering by fire, calling out to Him Who was born
of the Virgin: accept our all-consumed burnt offering as You
accepted gifts of gold, myrrh and frankincense from the
Persian kings, O God existing from all eternity.

29

The Holy Innocents killed for Christ by Herod in
Bethlehem of Judea.
Our Venerable Father Marcellus, Hegumen of the
Akimetes [Sleepless Ones, that is, those
who keep prayer vigil day and night by turns]
Monastery(486).
Troparion, Tone 1:

O Lover of Mankind, accept the sufferings which Your
saints endured for You. As we pray, heal all our pains.

711

Menologion - December

Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Infants, Tone 6:
When the King was born in Bethlehem, wise men from
Persia came bringing gifts. They were led by the brilliant
star. But Herod became exceedingly agitated, and had the
infants harvested like lamenting wheat, for he sees his power
suddenly coming to an end.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 2:
You rose in the East shining like a radiant star, O allblessed Marcellus, and you edified with good deeds. You
were a teacher to many monks, O venerable one. Therefore,
you were a light to the imperial city. For this we sing to you:
rejoice, O all-blessed father.

30

The Holy Martyr Anysia.
The Venerable Zoticus, Priest and Protector of 		
Orphans (4th Century).
Troparion of the feast.
Troparion of the Woman Martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb, O Jesus: see page 553.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 552.
712

Menologion - December

Kontakion of the Woman Martyr, Tone 3:
Today this martyr destroys the seduction of the devil by
faithful devotion and demolishes the enemy by the martyrdom
of suffering for the faith, and the angels  bestow upon her the
gift of a crown. For her sake, save us, O Savior of the world
and God in the Highest.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 2:
You loved the poor for the love of Christ, and you gave
them aid and comfort. Now you have inherited heaven’s
wealth, O most-wealthy Zoticus. This is why we all venerate
you and solemnly celebrate your memory.

31

Our Venerable Mother Melany of Rome (438).
Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:

You loved the purity of virginity and convinced your
husband with gracious words. You spent your fortunes for
the monks and nuns, and you built monasteries for them, O
Melany, blessed by God. Therefore you have gone to dwell in
a heavenly monastery. Remember us, O all-glorious Melany.
Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 4:
You fulfilled the divine mandate and gave your gold to the
multitude of the poor. Joining your husband, you took up your
cross and followed Christ, crucified in the flesh, our only God.
On this day the leave-taking of the Nativity of Christ
is celebrated.

713

Menologion - December

714

1

January
THE CIRCUMCISION ACCORDING TO
THE FLESH OF OUR LORD, GOD, AND
SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER
AMONG THE SAINTS BASIL THE
GREAT, ARCHBISHOP OF CAESAREA
IN CAPPADOCIA (379).
Troparion of the Feast, Tone 1:

O Jesus, although You are seated on a fiery throne with
the eternal Father and Your divine Spirit, You were pleased
to be born of a virgin maiden, your Mother who has never
known man. Therefore, as man You were also circumcised
when You were eight days old. Glory to Your most noble
decision! Glory to Your salvation! Glory to Your humility!
You alone love mankind.
Troparion of the Saint, Tone 1:
Your voice resounds to the whole world which has
received your word of instruction in divine dogmas. You
explained the nature of creation and gave rules to order human
conduct. O royal priest, O venerable father Basil, beg Christ
our God to grant us His great mercy.
Kontakion of the Saint, Tone 4:
You have appeared as the unshakeable foundation of
the Church, leading all mortals to safe pasture in the Lord,
715

Menologion - January

and confirming them by your teachings, O venerable Basil,
revealer of heavenly mysteries.
Kontakion of the Feast, Tone 3:
The Lord of all endures circumcision and being good, He
cuts away the sins of mortals. Today He grants salvation to
the world, and the bishop Basil, the Creator’s morning star,
rejoices; he has been initiated into the mysteries of Christ.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who was circumcised according
to the Law on the eighth day for our salvation, have mercy on
us and save us:

2

Pre-festive Day of the Feast of Light [Theophany].
Our Holy Father Sylvester, Pope of Rome (335).
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:

Zebulun, make ready; Naphtali, prepare yourself. O River
Jordan, stand and leap for joy to receive the Master coming to
be baptized. O Adam, rejoice with the first mother, Eve, and
do not hide yourselves as once you did in Paradise. For, seeing
you naked, Christ has appeared to put on the first robe. He has
appeared to renew all creation.
Troparion of the Saint, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.

716

Menologion - January

Kontakion of the Saint, Tone 4:
O God-bearer of the King and God, having been a
companion of fasting ascetics, you were revealed as a priest
among priests: O father Sylvester, the glory of pastors, being
happy in the heavens where the angelic hosts now rejoice
together, save in love those who keep your memory.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:
Today the Lord appears in the Jordan’s streams and cries
out to John: do not be afraid to baptize me, for I have come to
save Adam, the first created.

3

The Holy Prophet Malachi.
The Holy Martyr Gordius (304).
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:

O God-wise Malachi, you announced the fearsome day
of the coming of Christ, and you prophesied of the fulfilment
of the Law, saying: truly the Lord is coming, Whom we have
joyfully sought in the temple, and now we pray to Him to save
our souls.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 4:
O Prophet, by bestowing rich prophesies, you clearly
predicted the coming of Christ, Who enlightened the world by
His radiance, and the salvation of the world.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 8:
As a soldier unyielding against suffering, and bearing
717

Menologion - January

the invincible crown among the martyrs, O Gordius, you are
worthy of all praise, rising in the east like a great star shining
with truth, and a martyr bestowing grace upon Christians.

4

The Synaxis of the Holy Seventy Apostles.
Our Venerable Father Theoctistus, Hegumen at
Cuomo Monastery in Sicily (800).
Troparion of the Apostles, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Apostles, Tone 2:

O faithful, let us praise the choir of the Seventy Disciples
of Christ, and let us sing praise to them in hymns. For they all
taught us to consider the Trinity undivided, and are the divine
shining lights of our Faith.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 1:
You gained your merit by feeding the sheep of the Lord
by your words of exhortation in an unfeeling land, O Godbearing Theoctistus. You filled it with zeal and presented it to
the Savior. Now that you have passed over to Him, you have
received a reward worthy of your troubles. Glory to Him Who
gave you strength. Glory to Him Who crowned you. Glory to
Him Who heals all through your labors.

718

Menologion - January

5

The Holy Martyrs Theopemptus and Theonas (c. 350).
Our Venerable Mother Syncletica (4th Century).
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:

After Elijah had been taken up, the River Jordan was
parted in two by Elisha’s mantle; and a dry path was opened
in the waters as an image of true baptism by which we pass
beyond this fleeting life. Christ appeared at the Jordan to
sanctify the waters.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 2:
O most compassionate Christ, Who take away the many
sins of all, because of Your immeasurable mercy, You have
come to be baptized in the waters of the Jordan as a man,
clothing in a robe of glory the misery of my ancient nakedness.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 1:
Theopemptus with the mighty Theonas have been
revealed as a means of holiness to those on earth. How well
they endured the suffering imposed by the torturer. They
rejoice in the Lord and sing: we adore Him Who buried the
sins of all in the flowing waters of the Jordan.

719

Menologion - January

Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 5:
You endured the pain of your suffering by fasting. You
are delighted to find a finer dwelling in heaven and have been
filled with more splendid light because you followed Christ so
courageously along the difficult path. You turned away from
the goods of earth and became like an angel. Now you share
in their glory.

6

THE HOLY THEOPHANY OF OUR LORD,
GOD, AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
Troparion, Tone 1:

At your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord, worship of the
Trinity was revealed; for the Father’s voice bore witness to
You, calling You His beloved Son, and the Spirit in the form
of a dove confirmed the truth of these words. O Christ God,
You appeared and enlightened the world. Glory to You!
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You have revealed yourself to the world today; and Your
light, O Lord, has set its seal on us. We recognize You and
exclaim to You: You have come and revealed Yourself, O
Unapproachable Light.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation deigned
to be baptized by John in the Jordan, have mercy on us and
save us:
720

Menologion - January

7

The Synaxis of the Holy, Glorious Prophet,
Forerunner, and Baptist John.
Troparion of the Forerunner, Tone 2:

The memory of the righteous is celebrated with praise,
but for you, O Forerunner, the Lord’s testimony is enough.
You were shown to be more honorable than the prophets since
you were deemed worthy to baptize in the waters the Lord you
had proclaimed. Therefore, you fought for the truth, and with
joy proclaimed the good news to those in Hades, that God has
appeared in the flesh to take away the sins of the world and to
grant us great mercy.
Or this, in the same tone:
O prophet, Forerunner, and dweller in the desert, you
heard the divine voice of the Father, you were deemed worthy
to baptize the Son and Lord, and you were a witness of the
Holy Spirit. Having proclaimed the baptism of repentence,
now ask for us the forgiveness of sins, that through your
prayers we may receive the great mercy of Christ our God.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
The River Jordan trembled, and was driven back filled
with fear at your coming in the flesh, while John drew back
in awe as he fulfilled the ministry of the Spirit. The ranks of
angels stood amazed when they beheld You baptized in the
stream, and we, who were in darkness, are filled with light,
praising You, God-made-manifest, Who enlighten all!

721

Menologion - January

8

Our Venerable Father George the Chozebite (614)
and [Our Venerable Father] Emilian the
Confessor (767).
Our Venerable Mother Domnica (474).
Troparion of the feast.
Troparion of the Venerable Men, Tone 4:

Come, O people, and piously honor the memory of
George. Sing praises for his wonderful fasting and praise
Emilian for his profession. Let us cry out: O Christ, save our
souls for the sake of Your venerable men.
Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Kontakion of George, Tone 4:
You were revealed as the brightest star, O George,
enlightening with divine rays those who faithfully call to you:
Pray for us to the Master, Christ, Who has revealed Himself in
the streams, and Who enlightens those born on earth.
Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 4:
O Domnica, you crucified the flesh with your sufferings,
and your love for Christ was total and constant. For this you
have been crowned and admitted to the choirs of the angels.
Pray for all those who venerate you, O venerable mother.

722

Menologion - January

9

The Holy Martyr Polyeuctus (230).
Troparion of the feast.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:

When the Savior bowed His head in the Jordan, the heads
of the serpents were crushed; when Polyeuctus was beheaded,
the cunning demons were put to shame.

10

Our Father among the Saints Gregory of Nyssa (c. 395).
The Venerable Dometian, Bishop of Melitene (602).
Our Venerable Father Marcion, Priest and Econome
of the Great Church (c. 471).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

Watching with the eye of your soul, O Bishop, revealing
yourself as a watchful shepherd for the world, and with the
staff of your wisdom and your fervent intercession, you drove
away all slanderers like wolves, and preserved your flock
unharmed, O all-wise Gregory.

723

Menologion - January

Or this, Tone 3:
That divine hierarch of the Church and precious mystic
orator of Wisdom, that vigilant mind, Gregory of Nyssa, sings
praises along with the angels and finds delight in the Light
divine. He prays unceasingly for all of us.
Kontakion of the Venerable Man, Tone 1:
You were anointed with the divine priesthood, and you
showed this by virtue and obedience to Christ. Having finished
your course, O Father, you sing with the angels in heaven:
glory to Your compassion, O Savior! Glory to Your kingdom!
Glory to Your providence, O only Lover of Mankind.

11

Our Venerable Father Theodosius, Founder of
the common [cenœbitic monastic] life (529).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Planted in the courts of your Lord, you beautifully
blossomed by your venerable virtues and you multiplied
your children in the wilderness, giving them drink from the
streams of your tears, O flock-master of God’s divine courts.
Therefore let us cry: rejoice, O father Theodosius.

724

Menologion - January

12

The Holy Martyr Tatiana (c. 227).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb, O Jesus: see page 553.
Or this, Tone 2:

You followed the most pure Lamb and Shepherd, O
Tatiana, spiritual lamb, and you did not fear the spiritual
beasts, but you armed yourself with the Sign of the cross
and you vanquished them to the end. You have entered the
heavenly sheepfold; remember us there, most wondrous
Martyr of Christ.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
O passion-bearer, adorned with your blood you shone
forth radiantly in your suffering, and like a beautiful dove
you soared to the heavens, O Tatiana. Therefore, ever pray for
those who honor you.

13

The Holy Martyrs Hermylaus and Stratonicus (c. 309).

On this day the holy fathers in Sinai and Raithu killed
by Bedouin is sung together with this commemoration so
that the leave-taking of the feast of holy Theophany is on
the 14th day.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
725

Menologion - January

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 1:
O martyrs, you both met a blessed end in water and
drowned the devil by the grace of God. You have received
crowns of triumph for this and have been admitted to angelic
choirs. Now remember those who honor you.

14

Our Venerable Fathers massacred [by the Arabs] in
Sinai and Raitho (312).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Having escaped from worldly fame, and having died
to the quiet refuge, you were crowned with the blood of
martyrdom and labor of fasting. Therefore, you demonstrated
the universality of martyrs and venerable ones.
And in memory of the repose of the holy, Equal-tothe Apostles, Nina, Enlightener of Georgia.
On this day is the leave-taking of the feast of holy
Theophany.

15

Our Venerable Fathers Paul of Thebes (c. 345)
and John the Hut-dweller (5th Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:

God of our fathers: see page 549.
726

Menologion - January

Kontakion of Paul, Tone 3:
Assembling together today, let us praise the venerable
one in song as the unwaning ray of the ideal Sun, for you
shine on those in the darkness of ignorance, leading all to
divine heights, O venerable Paul, adornment of Thebes, firm
foundation of fathers and fasters.
Kontakion of John, Tone 2:
Having loved evangelical poverty freely accepted, you
turned down your parents’ wealth, O most wise John. Taking
the Gospel of Christ in your hands, you followed Him; now
pray for us unceasingly.

16

The Veneration of the Precious Chains of the
Holy and All-Praiseworthy Apostle Peter.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Without leaving Rome you come to us by your precious
chains which you wore. We venerate them in faith, O Apostle
of the first throne, and and we pray: through your prayers to
God grant great mercy to us.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us praise the great Peter, the highest and first among
the apostles, truly the disciple of the Divine One. Therefore,
let us kiss his chains with faith, that he may grant forgiveness
of our sins.
Or this, in the same tone:
Christ the Rock gloriously praises the rock of faith, the
First-throne of the disciples, O Peter. He commands all to
727

Menologion - January

celebrate the feast of your wondrous and honorable chains,
and He grants remission of sins.

17

Our Venerable and God-bearing Father
Anthony the Great (356).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Father Anthony, you zealously imitated Elijah in
righteousness, and you followed the straight paths of the
Baptist. You were a desert-dweller and established the world
through your prayers. Therefore, pray to Christ God for the
salvation of our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having rejected the cares of this life, you quietly ended
this way of life, imitating the Baptist in every model of
venerable asceticism. Together with him we honor you, O
Anthony, the Beginner of the ascetical fathers.

18

Our Fathers among the Saints and Archbishops
of Alexandria, Athanasius (373) and
Cyril (444).
Troparion, Tone 3:

Having shone with deeds of the true faith, having
extinguished all heretical slander, you were victorious trophybearers. Having enriched all with God-fearing piety, you
greatly beautified the Church, and you properly found Christ
God, granting us great mercy.
728

Menologion - January

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Most magnified hierarchs of piety, and noble defenders
of the Church of Christ, preserve all who sing: “Save, O
Compassionate One, those who through faith honor You.”

19

Our Venerable Father Macarius of Egypt (390).
Troparion, Tone 1:

You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Having ended a blessed way of life with the choir of
martyrs, you worthily dwelt in the land of the meek, O Godbearer Macarius, and having populated the desert as if a city,
you received the grace of wonders from God; therefore, we
honor you.

20

Our Venerable and God-bearing Father 		
Euthymius the Great (473).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Joy to you, O barren wilderness; rejoice, sterile desert
that has never known the travail of birth, for your spouse has
multiplied your children. He has planted them in devotion
and piety, and made them grow in detachment for the sake of
perfect virtue. Through his prayers, O Christ God, give peace
to our lives.
729

Menologion - January

Kontakion, Tone 8:
Creation brought joy to your precious birth, O venerable
one, and to your divine memory they bring many wonders.
Bestow the wealth of these on our souls and cleanse the sins
of filth, that we may sing: Alleluia.

21

Our Venerable Father Maximus the Confessor (c. 620).
The Holy Martyr Neophyte (4th Century).
The Holy Martyrs Eugene, Candidus, Valerian, and
Aquila.
Troparion of Maximus, Tone 8:

Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Troparion of Neophyte, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Today the Church is filled with hymns, and the whole
world is radiant with miracles, for these four holy men have
bravely resisted false temptations, and in their faith they
confessed Christ. Therefore, O saints, obtain the remission of
sins for those who praise your memory.
Kontakion of Maximus, Tone 8:
Zealot of the Trinity, great Maximus, who clearly taught
the divine Faith and to glorify Christ in two natures, wills
and energies. Let us, O faithful, honor him in worthy hymns,
crying out: rejoice, O preacher of the Faith.
730

Menologion - January

Kontakion of Neophyte, Tone 4:
You are a new shoot in the garden of Christ’s passionbearers. You offer the fruits of heavenly understanding which
nourish those who venerate you in faith. O glorious, wise,
and brave martyr, Neophyte, as you stand before God, pray
always for our salvation.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
Having assembled together, let us praise the devoted
and God-bearing martyrs shining as stars of light: Eugene,
Candidus, Valerian, and Aquila with them. They spurned the
goods of this world, and we honor them as a choir of four.

22

The Holy Apostle Timothy.
The Holy Venerable Martyr Anastasius the Persian (628).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 4:

Having learned goodness and being temperate in all
things, divinely clothed with the priesthood in integrity, you
drew ineffable truths from the chosen vessel, and embraced
the Faith. You completed a course equal to his. O Apostle
Timothy: pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Let us, the faithful, sing praises to Timothy, divine
disciple, and companion of Paul, and with him honor the wise
Anastasius, who shone like a star from Persia, driving away
our spiritual passions and carnal infirmities.
731

Menologion - January

23

The Holy Martyr Clement, Bishop of Ancyra (c. 296).
The Holy Martyr Agathangel (c. 296).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Vine of venerable behavior and stalk of suffering, a flower
of holiness and fruit granted by God, you were given to the
faithful, O ever-blooming all-holy one: but as one who suffered
with the martyrs, and with the throne of first hierarchs, pray to
Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were an honorable branch of the vine of Christ, O
much-suffering Clement revealed as all-praised. You cried
out with your companions in suffering: O Christ, You are the
shining joy of martyrs.

24

Our Venerable Mother Xenia of Rome (450).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Celebrating your wondrous memory, O Xenia, as we
honor you with love, let us sing to Christ Who granted you
healing strength in all things. Always pray to Him for all of us.

732

Menologion - January

25

Our Father among the Saints Gregory the
Theologian, [Archbishop of Constantinople]
(389).
Troparion, Tone 1:

Your theology like a shepherd’s flute has overcome the
trumpet blasts of orators. As you have searched the depths
of the Spirit, beauty of speech was also given to you. Father
Gregory, now pray to Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
O glorious one, you destroyed rhetorical traps with your
theological tongue, and you adorned the Church with the robes
of orthodoxy woven from on high, and wearing them she cries
out with us, your children: Rejoice, O father, supreme mind
of theology.

26

Our Venerable Father Xenophon and his Wife Mary
(520).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You were vigilant in the commandments of the Master,
distributing your wealth to the poor silently, O blessed one,
with your wife and children. Therefore, you inherited the
divine pleasure.
733

Menologion - January

Or this, in the same tone:
Having overcome the sea of life, righteous Xenophon,
together with your honorable yoke-mate, in company with
your children in heaven, you extol Christ.

27

The Translation of the precious Relics of our
Father among the Saints John Chrysostom
(438).
Troparion, Tone 8:

The divine Church sings praises and the whole world
radiantly celebrates the transfer of your honorable relics,
O venerable hierarch John Chrysostom. You lived in Godfearing piety among hierarchs and freely willed to be a martyr.
Therefore, we sing to you: O tortured martyr who shared the
throne of hierarchs, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Or this, in the same tone:
The grace shining forth from your mouth like a torch has
enlightened the universe; it has stored up in the world the
treasure of disdain for wealth. It has shown us the heights of
humility. Instruct us by your words, John Chrysostom, our
father, and intercede with the Word, Christ God, to save our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
The honorable Church is mystically joyful in the return of
your honorable relics, and hiding them as gold of much value!
Through your prayers, O John Chrysostom, abundantly grant
healing grace to those singing to you.
734

Menologion - January

28

Our Venerable Father Ephrem the Syrian (378).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Foreseeing the hour of everlasting judgment, as a loving
anchorite you wept bitterly, O Ephrem. You were a teacher
who labored at his duties, O venerable one. Therefore, you
awaken the slothful to repentance, O universal father.

29

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy Priest
Martyr Ignatius the God-bearer [Bishop of
Antioch] (6th Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Having offered yourself as a consecrated gift to God, you
were thrown to the ravenous animals. Therefore, you received
a crown of victory and reception into heaven from God for
this. Save those who honor you as a hierarch of Christ, a
teacher, and a companion of martyrs.
Or this, in the same tone:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Today you rose from the East, enlightening all creation
with your teachings, and adorned with martyrdom, Godbearing and divine Ignatius.
735

Menologion - January

30

THE THREE HOLY HIERARCHS AND GREAT
ARCHBISHOPS: BASIL THE GREAT,
GREGORY THE THEOLOGIAN, AND
JOHN CHRYSOSTOM.
The Holy Priest-Martyr Hippolytus [of Rome]
(235).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Teachers of the world, of one mind with the apostles,
intercede with the Lord of all to grant peace to the world, and
abundant mercy to our souls.
Kontakion of the
Hierarchs, Tone 2:
Lord, You have
received Your holy and
inspired preachers, the
foremost of teachers,
into the enjoyment of
Your good gifts and
repose. You preferred
their labors and death
above any sacrifice. For
You alone glorify Your
saints.
Troparion of the
Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
736

Menologion - January

Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 1:
You have appeared to the world as an ever-shining
candelabrum, your divine words like illuminating lightning.
The faithful beseech you, priest Hippolytus: because we all
celebrate with joy your service and your divine memory, and
faithfully praise you.

31

The Holy Wonder-workers and Unmercenaries
[Physicians] Cyrus and John (311).
Troparion, Tone 5:

The grace of the Trinity settled in your pure hearts, O
most blessed Cyrus and John. You have become marvelous
exorcists of impure spirits. You were doctors over hidden and
visible illnesses. Therefore, you possess confidence before
God Who loves mankind, through your unceasing prayers
heal our spiritual diseases.
Or this, in the same tone:
The miracles of Your holy martyrs give us unconquerable
shelter, O Christ God: through their prayers overcome the
snares of the nations by the strength of the scepter of the
kingdom, for You alone are good and the Lover of Mankind.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Having received the gift of wonders from divine grace, O
holy ones, work wonders unceasingly, cut out all our passions
through your unseen skill, O God-wise Cyrus with glorious
John, for you are divine physicians.
737

Menologion - January

738

February

1

Pre-festive Day of the Meeting of our Lord, God
and Savior, Jesus Christ.
The Holy Martyr Tryphon (250).
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 1:

The angelic choir of heaven looks earthward, peering
down from the heavenly heights to behold the firstborn of all
creation carried into the Temple as an infant in the arms of the
mother who has not known man. Together with us they are
overwhelmed with awe and sing a hymn in preparation for
the feast.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 6:
The invisible Word of the Father has become visible in
the flesh. He was born of the Virgin ineffably and was placed
in the arms of the elderly priest. Let us all worship Him, our
true God.

739

Menologion - February

Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 8:
You have destroyed polytheism to the ends of the earth
with firm Trinitarian resolve, O all glorious; you were honored
by Christ. And having conquered the torturers through Christ
the Savior, you received the crown of martyrdom and the gift
of divine healing, for you are invincible.

2

THE MEETING OF OUR LORD GOD AND
SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST [WITH SIMEON
AND ANNA].

A Feast, and fish is permitted, during the holy Forty
Day Fast.
Troparion, Tone 1:
Rejoice, Theotokos,
Virgin full of grace; for
from you has shown forth
the Sun of Justice, Christ
our God, enlightening
those who are in darkness.
Rejoice also, you just
elder; you received in
your arms the liberator of
our souls, who grants us
resurrection.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Christ our God,
through Your birth You
sanctified the virgin’s
740

Menologion - February

womb and blessed the hands of Simeon as was proper. Now
You have come and saved us. Give peace to nations at war and
strengthen our government. You, alone, love mankind.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who for our salvation deigned
to be held in the arms of the righteous Simeon, have mercy on
us and save us:

3

The Synaxis of the Holy and Just Simeon, Who
received God, and the Prophetess Anna.
Troparion of the feast.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Today the elder Simeon is filled with happiness, receiving
in his arms the eternal God as an infant. And he begs to be
released from the bonds of the flesh, for he says: my eyes have
seen the salvation of the world.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Today the elder is removed from the bonds of his prayerful
way of life in the flesh taking in his hands Christ, the Creator
and Lord.
Or this, in the same tone:
Today the elder Simeon, receiving the Creator and Lord
of all into his arms, prayed to be released from the bonds of
this corruptible life. He was released and departed to eternal
life.
741

Menologion - February

4

Our Venerable Father Isidore of Pelusium (c. 450).

If it is not the 40 Day Fast, the service of the feast and
the saint [is observed].
Troparion of the Venerable Man, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
The Church, finding you another morning star, O most
glorious one, enlightening her by the lightning of your words,
cries out to you: Rejoice, O all-blessed, God-wise Isidore.

5

The Holy Martyr Agatha (250).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Let the Church be adorned this day with glorious purple,
dyed with the pure blood of the martyr Agatha, crying out:
Rejoice, praise of Catania.

6

Our Venerable Father Bucolus, Bishop of Smyrna
(2nd Century).
The Holy Martyr Silvanus, Bishop of Emesa,
and his Companions (313).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
742

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Shining with the light of the priesthood, you enlightened
the people, O bishop. You destroyed the darkness of idolatry,
and you dispersed the clouds of the passions by your cures.
You have gone before the unsetting Light. Now we ask you to
pray for us who honor you, O all-blessed Bucolus.

7

Our Venerable Father Parthenius, Bishop of 		
Lampsacus (318).
Our Venerable Father Luke.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

You received the divine grace of miracles, O God-wise
priest, God-bearer, and wonderworker, Parthenius. You
cleansed all the faithful of passions and drove away evil
spirits, O father. Therefore, we sing to you as a great revealer
of the mysteries of the grace of God.
Kontakion of Luke, Tone 8:
God, Who chose you before birth for His service and led
by Him by destiny, always sanctifies you from the womb and
reveals you as His slave, directing your path, Luke, as a lover
of mankind. Now, rejoicing, you stand before Him.

743

Menologion - February

8

The Holy Great Martyr Theodore the Recruit (318).
The Holy Prophet Zechariah the Sickle.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Recruited by the truth, O passion-bearer Theodore, you
proved yourself a capable warrior for the King of heaven.
You equipped yourself wisely with the armor of faith and
conquered legions of demons. Because you revealed yourself
as a victorious athlete, therefore in faith we ever bless you.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You put on the whole armor of faith with courage and
took the word of God as a spear in your hand. You conquered
the enemy, Theodore, great among martyrs. Together with
them, never cease to pray to Christ God for all of us.
Kontakion of the prophet, Tone 2:
You saw the chariots being directed by the hand of the
God of all, and you looked down upon the bodiless servants,
O Zechariah. As you rejoice among them now as an evermemorable prophet, pray for those who celebrate your memory
with faith, O all-sanctified one, that we may be directed upon
the road of divine understanding.

9

The Holy Martyr Nicephorus (260).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord: see page 550.
744

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 1:
Having been united in love, O Nicephorus, you clearly
destroyed the spite of hatred, and beheaded by the sword, you
became a divine martyr of the incarnate Savior; pray for us,
who sing your glorious memory.
Or this, Tone 3:
O glorious one, you were inspired by the love of the
Lord, and taking His precious cross upon your shoulders,
you shamed the goats of the devil. You endured even to death
and have been revealed a true conqueror, a defender, and an
initiate in the mystery of grace.
On this day is the leave-taking of the feast of the Meeting.

10

The Holy Martyr Charalampus (203).
[In Benedictine communities: Our Venerable Mother
Scholastica (c. 547).]
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Made perfect by the grace of the priesthood, O glorious
one, you adorned the Church with splendor through your
divine suffering. You rejoiced as you bravely accepted torture
for the sake of Christ, O Charalampus, and honored lamp of
the universe, enlightening the ends of the world, for you are
invincible.
745

Menologion - February

11

The Holy Martyr Blaise, Bishop of Sebaste (316).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Holy plant, God-bearing martyr Blaise, unfading blossom
and fertile vine in Christ’s vineyard, fill with joy the hearts
of those who fervently celebrate your memory; intercede
without ceasing for all of us.

12

Our Father among the Saints Meletius, Archbishop
of Antioch (381).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 6:

The apostate Macedonius fled in fear from your spiritual
courage. We your servants run to you for your prayerful
service. O Meletius, converser with angels and fiery sword
of Christ our God, we sing praises to you, the lamp that
enlightens all.

13

Our Venerable Father Martinian (c. 398).
Troparion, Tone 8:

O blessed one, you appeased the flames of passion with
streams of tears; you calmed the waves of the sea and stopped
746

Menologion - February

the assault of the wild beasts. You cried out: glorified are You,
O almighty God, saving me from fire and storm.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us worthily praise in hymns the ever-memorable
Martinian, the pious and practiced ascetic, and the honorable
sufferer and desert dweller and settler, for he trampled on the
serpent.

14

Our Venerable Father Auxentius (5th Century).
Troparion, Tone 1:
You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

You found your joy in asceticism, O God-wise one, and
you mastered the desires of the body; you grew stronger in
the knowledge of faith; you blossomed like a tree of life in the
Garden, O holy father Auxentius.
The Passing of our Venerable Father Constantine
the Philosopher, in the monastic life called
Cyril, Teacher of the Slavs (869).
Troparion, Tone 4:
From infancy you diligently made wisdom as your sister,
O Voice of God, and, having perceived most radiantly, took
her as a chaste virgin wife. You adorned your mind and soul
with it like a gold yoke. You became a second Cyril, O blessed
one, with the name of reason and wisdom.
747

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 2:
With firm and divinely inspired teaching, and enlightening
the world with an exceedingly bright dawn, flashing around
the universe like lightening, O Blessed Cyril, you spread the
most holy word of God, to the West and to the North and to
the South enlightening the world with wonders.
The Venerable Maron, Hermit and Wonder-worker
(c. 423).

15

The Holy Apostle Onesimus.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Onesimus: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Like a ray from the sun you shone to the universe, O
Blessed One, shining with the rays of the resplendent Paul,
who enlightened the world. Therefore we honor you, O
Glorious Onesimus.

16

The Holy Martyrs, the Presbyter Pamphilius,
Porphyrius, and their Companions (309).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.

748

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 4:
To the frightful tortures prepared for them, the
courageous sufferers of the Lord went with joy and unbending
determination, having discussed the spurning of the flesh.
Therefore they obtained eternal glory, ever praying for us,
who praise their struggle.

17

The Holy Great Martyr Theodore the Recruit
(306).
Troparion, Tone 2:

Great are the accomplishments of faith. The holy martyr
Theodore rejoiced in the fountain of flames just as if resting
in calm water. Consumed in the fire, he was offered up like
a sacrifice of sweet-breads to the Holy Trinity. Through his
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Having accepted the faith of Christ in your heart like
a shield, you trampled down the adverse powers, O GreatSufferer. Therefore, you have been crowned eternally with a
heavenly crown, O Theodore, as one who is invincible.

18

Our Father among the Saints Leo, Pope of Rome
(461).
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
749

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 3:
Sitting on the throne of the priesthood, O Glorious One,
you stopped the mouths of the rational lions with divinelyinspired dogmas of the precious Trinity, and illumined your
flock with the light of knowledge of God. For this, you have
been glorified as a divine mystic of the grace of God.

19

The Holy Apostle Archippus.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Archippus: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

As a great shining star the Church has acquired you,
O Archippus; by the rays of your miracles it has been
enlightened, so it cries out to you: Save those who honor your
memory through faith.

20

Our Venerable Father Leo, Bishop of Catania (c. 787).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.

750

Menologion - February

Kontakion, Tone 8:
Like a lamp in the great church, all-blessed one, you are
shining more than the sun. Protect all through your prayers,
O blessed one, to be invincible and unshakable from every
heresy, and undefiled, as one in everlasting memory.

21

Our Venerable Father Timothy of Symbola (795).
Our Father among the Saints Eustathius, Archbishop
of Great Antioch (c. 338).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Having shone from the East like a multi-radiant star, you
shone into the hearts of the faithful the good deeds of your
miracles, O all-blessed wonderworker Timothy.
Kontakion of Eustathius, Tone 3:
You preached that the Word was of one essence with
the Father and the Spirit, O Bishop Eustathius, and you
demolished the paralysis of the heretical fortress of Arius
by your teaching. You were a heavenly light to the fathers of
the council, and were revealed as a champion of the Trinity.
As you stand before the Trinity, pray for the salvation of our
souls.

751

Menologion - February

22

The Finding of the Venerable Relics of the Martyrs at
Eugenius.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

O mighty pillars of faith and martyrs of good-victory,
you endured a host of pain for the sake of Christ, and you
lay hidden for many years. but now are revealed as precious
wealth, carried into the Church of God honorably by the hands
of the bishop, displayed for those who petition you to pray for
their souls.

23

The Holy Priest-martyr Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna
(c. 155).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

Offering verbal fruits for a sacrificial offering of virtuous
deeds to the Lord, you are glorified by God as a worthy
hierarch. For this reason, today we who have been enlightened
by your words, sing to your praiseworthy memory, glorifying
the Lord.

752

Menologion - February

24

The First and Second Finding of the Precious
Head of the Holy, Glorious Prophet and
Forerunner, and Baptist John.
Troparion, Tone 4:

The head of the Forerunner has shone from the earth
radiating rays of incorruption and healing on the faithful. It
assembles a multitude of angels from on high, and summons
together the human race on earth below, to send up glory with
one voice to Christ our God.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O Prophet of God and Forerunner of grace, your head has
come from the earth like a sacred rose. We are being healed
always; as of old, so now again, you preach repentance to the
world.

25

Our Father among the Saints Tarasius, Archbishop
of Constantinople (806).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Having explained the dogmas of the Church to those who
profess the true faith, and, O blessed one, having taught all
to venerate and worship the honorable icon of Christ, you
vanquished the godless iconoclastic heresy. For this reason,
let us cry out to you: Rejoice, O wise father Tarasius.
753

Menologion - February

26

Our Father among the Saints Porphyrius, Bishop
of Gaza (421).
Alleluia, or the Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Or this, in the same tone:

Who can recount all your works and sufferings of piety,
O father? For you never ceased working day or night until
you washed Gaza clean of impurity and replaced its evil ways
with sound devotion. Thereby, you always stand guard over
your flock. So, holy Porphyrius, pray to Christ God that He
may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Adorned by your dedicated habits, you glowed in
the vestments of the priesthood, O all-blessed God-wise
Porphyrius. And you spread beauty by the glory of your
healing, unceasingly praying all of us.

27

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Procopius the
Decapolite (741).
Troparion, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Today the Church possesses you as a morning star, dispels
all the darkness of heresy and honors you, O most glorious
Procopius, initiate of the Heavenly Mysteries.
754

Menologion - February

28

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil, Fellow
Ascetic of Procopius (741).
Troparion, Tone 1:
You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Having received divine revelation from on high, O wise
one, you left the turmoil of this world; and having embraced
venerably the monastic way of life, you actively received
the grace of working wonders and healing infirmities, O allblessed, priestly Basil.

29

Our Venerable Father Cassian (c. 453).

Whose memory we observe on the fourth [leap] year.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
As a venerable monk, you depended on God, and
enlightened with a good education, O John Cassian, the light
of your divine teaching which shone like the sun makes us
radiant. Ever pray to Christ for those who honor you with all
their heart and praise you warmly with love.

755

Menologion - February

756

March

1

The Holy Venerable Martyr Eudoxia (2nd Century).
If it is the Forty Days, we sing Alleluia.
If it is not, the Troparion, Tone 8:

You bound your soul to the love of Christ by purity of
heart, and you spurned perishable things as a disciple of the
Word. You brought your senses under control by fasting, and
then you shamed the enemy by enduring martyrdom. Because
of this Christ gave you a double crown, O glorious Eudoxia,
venerable martyr: pray to Christ God that He may save our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having struggled well in asceticism during your suffering,
you sanctify us even after death with the pouring out of
wonders, O all-praised one. Those who hasten to you in faith
in the divine church and solemnly celebrate, we pray to you,
O venerable martyr Eudoxia, that we may be delivered from
spiritual infirmities and receive the grace of wonders.

757

Menologion - March

2

The Holy Priest-Martyr Theodotus, Bishop of Cyrene
(302).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Having denounced the depths of false belief, you also
wounded the godlessness of idolatry with true belief. Having
been a divine whole-burnt offering, you also refreshed the
ends of the earth with wonderworking. O father Theodotus
the hierarch, pray to Christ God to grant us great mercy.

3

The Holy Martyr Eutropius and his Companions,
Cleonicus and Basiliscus (308).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

This trinity of martyrs confessed the Precious Trinity
before many nations. Undergoing their suffering of martyrdom,
they have been presented to the angels. Today we are honoring
them, celebrating their sacred and life-saving memory.
758

Menologion - March

4

Our Venerable Father Gerasimus of the Jordan (475).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:

Living a life angelic in fasting and powerful in prayer,
unwavering in faith, unceasing in vigil, and temperate in all
things, you astonished the angels and vanquished the legions
of devils, O father Gerasimus. You gladden the hearts of the
faithful, O blessed saint. The beasts were obedient to you for
all of this. Since you have achieved a place of honor before
the Lord, pray for the salvation of our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having burned with care from above, you preferred the
harshness of the Jordan desert to all the sweet delights of
the world from where a wild beast served you in obedience
until your death, and died in grief on your grave, O father.
Therefore, God has glorified you and when you pray to Him
remember us, O father Gerasimus.

5

The Holy Martyr Conon (251).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:

With our hymns, let us praise Conon as a hard worker and
an unshakeable martyr. He is a blessed sufferer who received
power over devils. Let us praise him with hymns and cry out
to him: pray to Christ God that He may save our souls.
759

Menologion - March

Kontakion, Tone 3:
Having lived an angelic life on earth in your purity, you
were admitted in company with the angels in heaven. You
brought your parents to a knowledge of Christ and shed your
blood to profess the one God in the Trinity. Pray unceasingly
for all of us, O martyr Conon.

6

The Holy Forty-two Martyrs of Ammorium (848).
Allleuia, or the Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Let us all worthily crown with praiseworthy wreaths the
newly revealed stars of faith fervently suffering for Christ.
Praying to Christ for us, as true pillars they supported the
Christian realm.

7

The Holy Priest-Martyrs and Bishops of Cherson:
Basil, Ephrem, Capiton, Eugene, Etherius, and
others (4th Century).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
760

Menologion - March

Kontakion, Tone 2:
The radiant day of the pastors who brightly ruled as
bishops in Cherson has dawned, so let us sing of the feast for
those who suffered for the sheep of Christ. O priest-martyrs,
pray to the chief shepherd Christ, that He may number us with
the sheep on His right hand, so that we may cry out to you:
rejoice, blessed fathers, who poured out your blood for Christ.

8

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophylactus,
Bishop of Nicomedia (845).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 6:

You attempted to live a hidden life, O most praise worthy
one, but Christ made you as a light upon the spiritual rational
lamp. He handed you the tablets of spiritual knowledge:
enlighten us through them.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were revealed as a lamp to the ends of the world,
O bishop Theophylact. You preached that the Word is of one
essence with the Father and the Spirit. You explained this to
the godly fathers of the council. You were revealed as a pleaser
of the Trinity; standing before the Trinity, pray unceasingly
for all of us.

761

Menologion - March

9

The Forty Holy Martyrs, martyred at Sebaste on
a frozen lake (320).
Troparion, Tone 1:

O forty soldiers of Christ and honorable passion-bearers,
you went through fire and water, O mighty warriors, and have
come to live with the angels. Join them in praying to Christ for
those who praise you. Glory to Him Who strengthened you!
Glory to Him Who crowned you! Glory to Him Who heals us
through you!
Or this, in the same tone:
O Lover of Mankind, accept the sufferings which Your
saints endured for You. As we pray, heal all our pains.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
Holy long-suffering forty martyrs of the Lord, you all left
the military life of the world to unite yourselves to the Master
of the Heavens. Blessed ones, you proceeded through fire and
water, worthily accepting your many crowns of glory.

10

The Holy Martyr Quadratus and his Companions
(250).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
762

Menologion - March

Kontakion, Tone 4:
By enduring violence you slew the proud enemy as you
and your companions felt the pains of the sword, O all-wise
Quadratus. Therefore, we celebrate your honorable memory,
singing: remember us to the Lord, unconquerable martyr.

11

Our Father among the saints Sophronius, Patriarch
of Jerusalem (644).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Having struggled ascetically, with divine zeal, you spread
the precepts of truth with your lips. Having laid the foundation
of the church in good order, you firmly established there the
existing monastic rule, O Sophronius, most wise among the
patriarchs of Jerusalem. You brought all wise words into
the light and instructed by them, we cry out to you: Rejoice,
splendid praise of the true believers.

763

Menologion - March

12

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophane of
the Sygrian Mountain (817).
Our Father among the saints Gregory, Pope of Rome
(604).
Alleluia.
Troparion of Theophane, Tone 5:

Adorning your life with purity and disciplining your body,
you slew the goats of the devil, O father Theophane. You were
carried to eternal life in God. As a worthy communicant, pray
unceasingly that He have mercy on our souls.
Troparion of Gregory, Tone 4:
You received divine grace from God, O glorious Gregory,
and strength from His divine power. You who willed to follow
the gospel, O all-blessed one, pray to Him that He may save
our souls.
Kontakion of Theophane, Tone 2:
Having received divine revelation from above, you left
living fame with care. Having lived in solitude, O venerable
one, you accepted the wonder of action and the worthiness of
prophecy, having lost wealth and wife.
Kontakion of Gregory, Tone 4:
You became very much like the shepherds of Christ. You
led flocks of monks into the heavenly sheepfold. There you
taught your flock the law of Christ, O father Gregory, now
singing in the heavenly dwellings and rejoicing with them.
764

Menologion - March

13

The Translation of the Relics of our Holy Father
Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople (846).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:

You received your reward from your patience, unceasing
prayer, love of the poor, and constant comfort of the needy.
Now O blessed and merciful Nicephorus, pray Christ God that
He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
The patriarchal choir honors your holy memory in praises
and hymns, O Nicephorus. For in the translation of your body,
they receive your soul, O glorious one. Today the Church
extols Christ the King, and glorifies Him as the only Lover
of Mankind.

14

Our Venerable Father Benedict (550).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 6:

You were enriched with the grace of God, your labors
agreed with your name and you were revealed, O Benedict, as
pleasing to Christ God in prayers and fasting. You were filled
with the gifts of the Spirit of God, and you were a healer of
the sick, the banisher of enemies, and speedy intercessor for
our souls.
765

Menologion - March

15

The Holy Martyr Agapius and the Six Martyrs
with him (303).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

The choir of seven holy martyrs suffered powerfully for
the Divine Trinity, and by grace they destroyed many scheming
enemies. By the Spirit they are able to join the heavenly ones.
Through their prayers, be gracious to us, O Lover of Mankind.

16

The Holy Martyrs Sabinus and Papas (287).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

O God-bearing Sabinus, divine sprout, unfading flower,
fruitful branch, fill with your joy those who in faith honor
your memory, and pray unceasingly for all of us.

766

Menologion - March

17

Our Venerable Father Alexis, Man of God (411).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Elevated in virtuous works and purified in mind, you
attained the promised goal; having adorned your life with
passionlessness, and with a pure conscience, you took up
acceptable fasting; dwelling in prayer as if bodiless, you
shone like the sun in the world, all-blessed Alexis.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having been like a foreigner in the house of your parents,
you were installed in it as a model of the poor. Receiving
the crown of glory after your repose, you were revealed
wonderful on earth, O Alexis, man of God, joy of both angels
and humans.

18

Our Father among the saints Cyril, Archbishop of
Jerusalem (386).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549
Kontakion, Tone 1:

With your divinely inspired tongue, O wise one, you
illumined your people to honor One in the Trinity, indivisible
in essence yet separate in persons. Therefore, rejoicing, we
celebrate your all-holy memory, offering you as an intercessor
before God.
767

Menologion - March

19

The Holy Martyrs Chrysanthus and Daria (c. 253).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Desiring the perfect Good, you pursued whatever good
you saw. By your golden words of truth, blessed Chrysanthus,
you led the glorious Daria to Christ. She suffered tortures
and shamed the enemy. Remember us with all who faithful
celebrate your memory.

20

Our Venerable Fathers of the Saint Sabbas
Monastery, killed by Saracens (796).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You openly disdained the pleasure of earthly and
corruptible things, all-blessed ones, choosing a way of life in
the desert. You despised the most beautiful things of the world
and temporal food; hence you were granted the kingdom of
heaven, celebrating with the choirs of martyrs and ascetics.
Therefore, honoring your memory, we fervently cry out to
you: O fathers, deliver us from tribulations.
768

Menologion - March

21

Our Venerable Father and Confessor James, Bishop
of Catania (8th Century).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You subjected your body by abstinence from food, O
most-blessed James. You abandoned the world and followed
Christ. You were given the holy anointing of the priesthood,
and now you stand with the heavenly choirs. Pray for all of us
who praise you.

22

The Holy Priest-Martyr Basilides, Priest of Ancyra
(363).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Having lawfully completed the race, you preserved the
faith, O priest-martyr. For this you were granted the crown
of martyrdom and you were revealed an unshakeable pillar
of the church, having confessed the undivided Trinity, the
Son co-eternal with the Father and the Spirit. Pray to Him, to
deliver those honoring you from distress, that we may sing to
you: Rejoice, O God-wise Basilides.
769

Menologion - March

23

The Holy Venerable-Martyr Nicon and his Students
martyred with him (250).
[Venerable father Method Dominic Trcka.]
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Having first lived a venerable life, O Nicon, you assembled
a choir subjected to God, ever following you in God-fearing
devotion. From the east to the west you shine like the sun
dispersing darkness, and wash out deceit by the torrent of
your blood.

24

Pre-festive Day of the Annunciation of the most
holy Theotokos.
Our Venerable Father Zacharias.
Our Father among the Saints Artemon, Bishop of
Seleucia of Pisidia.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Today is the prelude of joy for all the world and hymns
are sung in anticipation. For, behold, Gabriel appears bringing
good news to the Virgin and exclaims to her: rejoice, O Full of
Grace, the Lord is with you.

770

Menologion - March

Kontakion, Tone 8:
By the descent of the All-Holy Spirit, at the sound of the
Archangel’s voice, O Theotokos, you conceived the One Who
shares the Father’s essence and His throne, and is Adam’s
restoration.

25

THE ANNUNCIATION OF OUR MOST HOLY
LADY, THE THEOTOKOS AND EVERVIRGIN MARY.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Today is the summit of our salvation, and what was hidden
from before all ages is revealed: the Son of God becomes a
virgin’s son, and Gabriel announces the good news of grace.
Therefore, let us exclaim with him to the Theotokos: Rejoice,
O Full of Grace, the Lord is with you.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Theotokos, valiant
defender, your servants offer
you hymns of victory in
thanksgiving, for you have
delivered us. But since you
have invincible power, free
us from all peril, that we may
exclaim to you: Rejoice, O
Unwedded Bride.

771

Menologion - March

26

The Synaxis of the Holy Archangel Gabriel.
If it is the Forty Days, Alleluia. If it is not:
Troparion, Tone 4:

Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us by your prayers and to
shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Commander of the angels, you are the glorious servant
and intercessor of the all-radiant and honorable, and allvirtuous, infinite and awesome Trinity. Now ever pray that
we may be delivered from every tribulation and suffering, that
we may cry out to you: rejoice, O Protection of your servants.

27

Our Holy Mother Matrona of Thessalonica (c. 350).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 5:

You served the Creator of all with devotion, O honorable
woman, not serving the unbelieving mistress. But you suffered
the assaults of her rage and being locked in the strong prison,
772

Menologion - March

and so were placed with God. O God-wise martyr Matrona,
pray for us who celebrate your memory.

28

Our Venerable Father Hilary the Younger (754).
The Holy Stephen the Wonder-worker.
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 5:

Like lamps shining like the sun, O fathers, your memory
enlightens the hearts of the faithful, casting out passions and
dispersing the darkness. Shelter with pure faith those of us
who celebrate your memory and deliver us from temptations
of life, O all-honorable Hilarion and Stephen.

29

Our Venerable Father Mark, Bishop of Arethusa, the
Deacon Cyril, and Others who suffered
martyrdom under Julian the Apostate (364).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.

773

Menologion - March

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having become a splendor of truth, you have illumined
the very ends of the earth. For this reason we bless you, O
blessed priests and martyrs.

30

Our Venerable Father John Climacus, Author of
“The Ladder” (649).
Troparion, Tone 4:

O venerable John, we have found your good deeds to be
a divine ladder leading us to heaven, for you were a model of
virtue. Therefore, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
John, our teacher and father, the Lord has raised you to the
heights of abstinence, to be a true guiding star enlightening
the ends of the earth.
Or this, in the same tone:
O wise and blessed one, you gave us your teaching from
your book as fruits ever ripe to liven the hearts of those who
hear them well. Your doctrine is like a ladder that leads to
heavenly and everlasting glory the souls of those who honor
you.

774

Menologion - March

31

Our Venerable Father Hypatius, Bishop of Gangra
(326).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

You shine over the earth, O holy father, Hypatius, and
you enlighten with wonders those who come to you in faith.
Having poured out your blood, O wise one, you willed even
more to be like Christ, and you sing with the angels in heaven,
praying for us: Glory to God Who strengthened you Glory to
Him Who crowned you. Glory to Him Who heals all through
you.

775

Menologion - March

776

April

1

Our Venerable Mother Mary of Egypt (c. 530).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Or this, in Tone 3:

Once, you who had been filled with all kinds of harlotry,
repentance has made you a bride of Christ. And by living the
angelic life, you destroyed the power of the devil with the
armor of the cross. By this you were revealed as the bride of
the King, O glorious Mary.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having fled the gloom of sin and enlightened your heart
with the light of repentance, O glorious one, you went to Christ,
bringing His all-immaculate and holy Mother as a merciful
intercessor before Him, and from where you found remission
of your transgressions, ever-rejoicing with the angels.

2

Our Venerable Father Titus the Wonder-worker
(9th Century).
Alleluia.
777

Menologion - April

Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 552.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Foresaking the turbulence of life, you lived your entire life
in tranquility, O wise one. You drew near to God, O wonderbearer Titus, our venerable father.

3

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Nicetas,
Hegumen of Medikion Monastery (824).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Acquiring a heavenly mind and life, shining brightly as
the sun in the splendor of your deeds, you enlightened those
living in darkness and lead all to God. O father Nicetas, pray
unceasingly for all of us.

4

Our Venerable Fathers, Joseph the Hymnographer
(883) and George of Maleon (9th Century).
Alleuia.
Troparion of Venerables, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.
778

Menologion - April

Kontakion of Joseph, Tone 4:
You are an inexhaustible source of repentance, an endless
bearer of comfort, and the depth of tenderness, O Joseph.
Grant us tears of divine repentance, and thanks that we, who
are crying, will receive comfort from God, asking for your
help, O saint.
Kontakion of George, Tone 3:
You wished to be the best friend of the Bridegroom, and
so you fled from bodily passions; you lived like an angel on
earth, O George. Therefore, we honor your holy dormition,
singing: pray Christ God to give us great mercy.

5

The Holy Martyrs Theodulus and Agathopodes and
their Companions (303).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Brothers by the grace of the Spirit, truly united as one
in pious faith, renowned indeed, you passed through life in
prayer and fasting, drawing people to divine knowledge.
Therefore, as brave soldiers, you imprisoned the deception of
the enemy; and suffering under the law, you were awarded
crowns: pray Christ God to grant remission of sins to those
who lovingly celebrate your holy memory.
779

Menologion - April

6

Our Father among the saints Eutyches, Archbishop
of Constantinople (582).
Alleluia, or the Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

Let us all faithfully sing to the blessed Eutychius, O
people, that we may lovingly bless him as a great shepherd,
server of the mysteries, all-wise teacher, and one who drives
out heresies, for he prays to the Lord for all of us.
The Passing of our Father among the saints
Methodius, Teacher of the Slavs (885).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your bishop, O Christ, made a bright solemnity of
dormition. Grant Your mercy from above, open the doors of
the kingdom, and destroy the chains of our many sins, through
the petitions of Your holy disciple and our father.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us all sing to the blessed and faithful Methodius, O
people, and lovingly bless him as a great shepherd for the
Slavs, an honorable servant of the Trinity, and the one who
drives out heresies, for he is praying for all of us.

7

Our Venerable Father George, Bishop of Mitylene (816).
Alleluia.
780

Menologion - April

Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were a light by the heights of humility that
extinguished to the very end the uprising of the spiritual
enemy with spiritual bravery, and O venerable father, you
were merciful: you gave wealth to the poor and fed the hungry
without respect of person. Therefore, at death you inherited
an eternal reward, rejoicing forever, O blessed hierarch
George. Pray to Christ God to give remission of sins to us
who celebrate your holy memory.

8

The Holy Apostles Herodian, Agabus, Rufus,
Asyncritus, Phlegon, and Hermes.
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.

Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were revealed as disciples of Christ and all-honorable
apostles, O glorious Herodion, Agabus and Rufus, Asyncritus,
Phlegon with Hermes. Ever pray to the Lord to grant remission
of sins to us who sing to you.

9

The Holy Martyr Eupsychius (c. 362).
Alleluia.

781

Menologion - April

Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Having accomplished the spiritual struggle with
courageous deeds, you were victorious over the enemy, O
martyr, being given honor and miracles from God. Therefore,
all the faithful of the Church honor you with worthy praise on
this preeminent day.

10

The Holy Martyrs Terence, Pompey, and their
Companions (250).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Let us come to remember the honorable martyrs today,
who are glad in everything, O all-wise Terence and his
companions. Therefore, let us warmly draw near, that we may
receive healing; for this they received the grace of the Holy
Spirit from God to heal the illnesses of our souls.

11

The Holy Priest-Martyr Antipas, Bishop of
Pergamum in Asia (c. 92).
Alleluia.
782

Menologion - April

Troparion, Tone 4:
You abolished the temptations of the idols, O Antipas,
and trampled down the power of the devil; you fearlessly
confessed Christ before the impious: Therefore, being installed
in the highest with the angelic ranks, offering doxology to the
Master of all, you offered a thanksgiving prayer service for us,
bestowing healing grace. Therefore, we honor you, O priestmartyr Antipas, pray to Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Sharing a throne with the Apostles you were also the
adornment of hierarchs, O blessed one; glorified as a martyr
you shone like the sun. Enlightening all, O dedicated Antipas,
you destroyed the deep night of impiety. Therefore, we honor
you as a divine priest-martyr and bearer of healing.

12

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil, Bishop
of Parium (735).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Illumined with the light from on high, O blessed father,
you enlighten all who honor your honorable suffering with
love, O suffering bishop Basil. Pray continually to Christ God
for all of us.
783

Menologion - April

13

The Holy Priest-Martyr Artemon and his
Companions (303).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You confessed the Faith like a priest would, and
completed your life in martyrdom. You passed into heaven,
O wise Artemon, having received an unfading crown from
God. Therefore, we celebrate your holy memory, crying out:
remember us, O priest-martyr, as you stand before Christ.

14

Our Father among the saints and Confessor Martin,
Pope of Rome (655).
The Holy New Martyrs Anthony, John, and
Eustathius (1342).
Alleluia.
Troparion of Martin, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

You who have rejected earthly honor and glory, valiant
and honorable combatants, you firmly and courageously
suffered torments for the faith; you have died for the life of all
784

Menologion - April

for the Master. Therefore, Christ also gloriously encircles you
with a column of clouds from heaven and honors you with
crowns from the throne of glory: Standing before Him with
the angels, pray to save our souls.
Kontakion of Martin, Tone 4:
You set out firmly with priestly devotion and completed
the course in martyrdom. You passed into heaven, O wise
Martin, and received laurels which will never fade. Now we
come to celebrate your holy memory, crying out: as you stand
before Christ, remember us, O martyr.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 3:
Released from the fatherly delusion O Saints, you were
led to Christ. By the diligence of all your souls you put human
cleverness to death, and so attaining the victory of true honor.
Unceasingly pray to our Master for all of us.

15

The Holy Apostles Aristarchus, Pudens, and
Trophimus.
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

This honorable apostolic feast is revealed, enlightening
us; dispelling the sinful mist, we call out: Let the light be
revealed and deliverance come.
785

Menologion - April

16

The Holy Virgins and Martyrs Agape, Irene, and
Chiona (c. 304). [Love, Peace, Purity].
Alleluia.
Troparion,  Tone 4:

You finished the race and kept the faith. O rational lambs,
you were led to Christ the Lamb and Shepherd by martyrdom.
Therefore, today, with spiritual joy, extolling Christ, we
properly celebrate your holy memory.
Kontakion of Irene, Tone 4:
O blessed one and brave soul, Irene, by faith you have set
up a defensive camp, clearly confusing the evil one; and you
have led many people out from darkness to Christ, bearing the
royal purple of their blood, you now rejoice with the angels.
Or this Kontakion, of the Martyrs, in the same tone:
Having pledged yourselves to the Lord so gracefully, you
made an offering of your blood at your martyrdom. O holy
martyrs, you have been admitted to heaven’s banquet hall, and
the splendid brilliance of the Light himself. As we celebrate
your holy memory, we bless the Savior and we cry out: pray
to the Lord for all of us.

786

Menologion - April

17

Our Venerable Father Simeon of Persia (c. 341).
The Venerable Acacius, Bishop of Melitene (435).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

Your holy memory shines on us like the sun, O most-wise
Simeon and Acacius, enlightening the faithful, who, therefore,
observe this day and cry out: pray for us to the only Lover of
Mankind.

18

Our Venerable Father John, Disciple of the Holy
Gregory the Decapolite (820).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You adorned your life by abstinence, O father, and
you destroyed the flesh. Therefore, you also conquered the
harmful burdens, O all-blessed one, and you came to God in a
quiet and eternal life, for you are a worthy heir, O John: Pray
to Him to save us.
787

Menologion - April

19

Our Venerable Father John of the Ancient Cave
(8th Century).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

You gave up food, wealth, and fame, and you lived as
a wanderer in the deserts. You withered your body by your
abstinence, and with courage you passed your life in silence.
For this we sing to you, O venerable model of virtue: beg
Christ God to forgive the sins of those who lovingly cherish
your memory.

20

Our Venerable Father Theodore the Hair-shirt
Wearer (c. 400).
Troparion, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You were revealed for your most wondrous life, O
Theodore, wise father, exchanging the treasury of royalty
for the rags of a hair-shirt here on earth. On this account you
were awakened with heaven’s garments. Ever pray for us, O
venerable one.
788

Menologion - April

21

The Holy Bishop Martyr Januarius and his
Companions (305).
The Holy Martyr Theodore of Perga.
Troparion, Tone 3:

Anointed with the chrism of the priesthood, you were
known to be shepherds for the divinely enlightened people.
Consumed as honorable lambs, you were offered to the
Word Who was the leader of the sacrificed lambs, O mostpraiseworthy priest-martyrs who enlighten the whole world.
Therefore, all honor your holy memory with love, so that you
may intercede for our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
You were adorned with the anointing of the priesthood, and
the blood of martyrdom, O glorious Januarius and Theodore,
and you shine everywhere rejoicing in the highest. Look down
upon us, who come to your temple, and continually cry out in
it: preserve us all, praying to God Who loves mankind.

22

Our Venerable Father Theodore the Sykiot (c. 613).

Troparion, Tone 2:
Having been known to be sanctified from a swathed child,
and revealed full of grace, you lit up the world with wonders,
and you drove away a multitude of demons, O sacred officiator
Theodore: Therefore, pray to the Lord for us.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
As upon a fiery chariot with virtues, O God-bearer,
ascending, you flowed to the heavenly mansions. You lived
with men like an angel and you exulted around with the angels
789

Menologion - April

as a man. Therefore, you were shown to be a divine vessel of
wonders, O venerable Theodore.

23

THE HOLY, GLORIOUS AND VICTORIOUS
GREAT MARTYR GEORGE THE
WONDER-WORKER (303).
Troparion, Tone 4:

You fought the good fight with faith, O George, martyr
of Christ. You convicted the tyrants of their wickedness. You
offered yourself as an acceptable sacrifice to God. Therefore,
you received a crown of victory, and through your prayers, O
holy one, you obtain forgiveness of sins for all.
Or this, in the same tone:
O victorious Great Martyr George, protector of the poor,
liberator of prisoners, physician of the sick, and champion of
kings, intercede with Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Cultivated by God, you became an excellent gardener
of religion, harvesting sheaves of virtues for yourself. You
sowed in tears but reaped in joy. You fought to the shedding of
your blood, and through your prayers, O holy one, you obtain
forgiveness of sins for all.

24

The Holy Martyr Sabbas the General (272).

Troparion, Tone 5:
You abandoned earthly rank and honors, O sufferer; you
confessed Christ existing as God before lying and tyrannical
emperors; you endured much suffering for His sake, O glorious
790

Menologion - April

one: Therefore, you were crowned with a beautiful wreath of
victory by the King who reigns over all, with heavenly armies,
brightly adorned and standing before Him, O Sabbas, pray
that He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Revealed as an invincible general, you conquered the
barbarian snares, and having suffered steadfastly, O glorious
one, you conquered a multitude of invisible enemies.
Therefore, you wove a wreath of victory. Pray to Christ for us
who faithfully honor you, O all-blessed Sabbas.

25

The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle and evangelist Mark: see page 548.
Or this, in the same tone:
Being taught by the supreme Apostle Peter, you became
an Apostle of Christ, and like the sun you shone on the
nations.You became the adornment of Alexandria, O blessed
one. For by you Egypt was freed from temptation; by your
evangelic teaching all are illumined like a light, O pillar of
the Church. Therefore, brightly celebrating your memory in
honor, O divinely-speaking Mark, pray to God Whose Gospel
is proclaimed by you that remission of sins is granted to our
souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Receiving the grace of the Spirit from on High, you
unraveled the rhetorical weavings, O Apostle, and having
caught all nations, O all-glorious Mark, you led them to your
Master, having preached the divine Gospel.
791

Menologion - April

26

The Holy Priest-Martyr Basil, Bishop of Amasea
(322).
Troparion,  Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Having defied the decree of the emperor, you obtained
the Kingdom of Heaven, O Basil. Rejoicing there, O priestmartyr, remember us who honor your memory.

27

The Holy Bishop-Martyr Simeon, Relative of
the Lord.
Our Venerable Father Stephen, Bishop of
Vladimir in Volhynia (1094).
Troparion, Tone 1:

As a kinsman of Christ, O high priest Simeon, we also
sacredly praise the steadfast martyr, who overcame temptation,
and embraced the faith: Therefore, celebrating your all-holy
memory today, we receive forgiveness of sins through your
prayers.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Like a most brilliant star, the church which today possesses
the divinely eloquent Simeon, radiantly cries out: rejoice, O
crown of honored martyrs.
792

Menologion - April

28

The Holy Apostles Jason and Sosipater.
The Holy Martyrs Dadas, Maximus, and Quintillian
(c. 350).
Our Father among the saints Cyril, Bishop of Turov
(c. 1182).
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle: see page 548.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Kontakion of the Apostles, Tone 4:

For you were revealed as an all-radiant star, enlightening
the universe with the light of preaching, O divine Apostles
Jason and Sosipater. Save those who honor you through faith.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 1:
You endured agony with courage, and the devil could not
prevail over you. O martyrs equal to the angels in honor, the
whole world honors your sufferings and pains. By them you
have been exalted.

29

The Nine Holy Martyrs of Cyzice (3rd Century).
Our Venerable Father Memnon the Wonder-worker
(c. 250).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
793

Menologion - April

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
The steadfast and all-radiant choir of nine martyrs,
confessors of the Triple-Sun Divinity, for your judgment in
the beginning, they cried out: Our blood, souls and bodies, we
offer to You an undefiled offering, O Master. You numbered us
in Your heavenly choir, for You are a merciful God.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Like a star you lead all with righteousness, enlightening
the world with virtuous deeds and wonders. We sing praise
to you, O blessed one: you were a communicant in the
divine light, and in this, O Memnon, you ascended to the
Unapproachable, Therefore, we honor your holy and lightbearing memory always, glorifying the Savior.

30

The Holy Apostle James, Brother of the Holy
[Apostle and Evangelist] John the Theologian.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle James: see page 548.
Or this, in the same tone:
You were a chosen Apostle of Christ, and the only brother
of the beloved theologian, O all-praised James. Ask remission
of sins for those who sing to you, and great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You heard the divine voice calling you; you overcame the
love of your father, and you ran after Christ with your brother,
O glorious James. Both of you were granted to see the divine
Transfiguration of the Lord.
794

May

1

The Holy Prophet Jeremiah.

Troparion, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Having cleansed the spirit, O great prophet and martyr, by
your radiant heart, O glorious Jeremiah, you received the gift
of prophecy from above, and you cried out loudly among the
nations: This is our God; there is none like Him Who appeared
incarnate on earth.

2

Our Father among the saints Athanasius the
Great (373).
Troparion,  Tone 3:

You became a pillar of orthodoxy, strengthening the
Church through divine dogmas, O high priest Athanasius. For
having preached that the Son is equal in nature to the Father,
you shamed Arius, O venerable father. Pray to Christ God to
grant us great mercy.
795

Menologion - May

Kontakion, Tone 2:
You planted the teaching of orthodoxy, cutting down the
weeds of slander, having increased the seeds of faith watered
by the Spirit, O venerable one; therefore, we sing to you, O
Athanasius.
Or this, in the same tone:
Blaring trumpet of the Lord and flute of the Spirit, O great
Athanasius, O fiery mind, it is fitting to sing your praises with
hymns; for you taught us to honor the Trinity of one essence.

3

The Holy Martyr Timothy and [his Wife] Maura
(286).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You suffered many kinds of wounds and received crowns
from God. Pray to the Lord for us, that we may solemnly
celebrate your all-holy memory, greatest Timothy and all
glorious Maura, that He may grant peace to our city and
people; for He is the foundation of the faithful.
The Passing of our Venerable Father Theodosius
of the Monastery of the Caves (1074).

Troparion, Tone 8:
Having been raised on virtues, having loved the monastic
life from childhood, and having valiantly reached your desire,
796

Menologion - May

you settled in a cave and adored your life with the radiance of
fasting. You abided in prayer like a bodiless being, shining in
the land of Rus as a bright lamp. O father Theodosius, pray to
Christ god to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3
Today let us honor a Slavic star who shone from the East
and came to the West. For this the whole land and all of us
were enriched by wonders and goodness, through the grace
and creation of the monastic rule of blessed Theodosius.

4

The Holy Martyr Pelagia (287).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb Pelagia, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Having distained the temporal, you became a partaker of
heavenly blessings. Having received the crown of sufferings,
O all-honorable Pelagia, for you offered streams of blood to
the Master, Christ. Pray to deliver us who honor your memory
from our tribulations.
Or this, Tone 1:
Having inflamed your soul with love for Christ, you
entered the boiling pot with strength of courage. You offered
yourself as a pleasing sacrifice to the Master. Therefore, we
honor your all-holy memory today and we sings hymns to
you.
797

Menologion - May

5

The Holy and Glorious Martyr Irene.
Our Venerable Father Nicephorus, Hegumen of the
Medikion Monastery (14th Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb Irene, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Adorned with the goodness of virginity, O virgin, you
became all-beautiful in your struggle, O Irene. You were
covered in purple with the flow of your blood, having
destroyed the temptation of godlessness. Therefore, you also
received the prize of victory from the hand of your Creator.
Or this, in the same tone:
Powerful in spirit, Irene, armed with faith, you were
known to deliver many people from the shame of the darkness
of evil and to transfer them to Christ, O blessed one, by the
purple garment from your blood. Now you rejoice with the
angels.

6

The Holy and Just Job the Long-suffering.
Troparion, Tone 1:

Having beheld the riches of the virtues of Job, the enemy
waited to rob the righteous one in ambush, and having
attacked the pillar of the body, could not steal the treasures of
the spirit, for they discovered his soul armed and undefiled.
They stripped and chained me. As You warned me: Before
the end, deliver me from the seducer, O Savior, and save me.
798

Menologion - May

Kontakion, Tone 8:
You were revealed as true and righteous, pious and
blameless, sanctified, O all-glorious one. Being truly pleasing
to God, you enlightened the world by your patience, O most
patient and valiant one. Therefore, all of us sing to your
memory, O divinely-wise one.

7

The Appearance of the Sign of the Precious cross
in the heavens at the third hour of the day
in the Holy City of Jerusalem, before the
Emperor Constantius (357).
The Holy Martyr Acacius (303).
Troparion of the cross, Tone 8:

The image of Your cross is radiating now more brightly
than the sun, stretching from the holy mountain to the place
of execution, and You have shown Your strength through
the sign of the cross, O Savior; by this sign also confirm the
faithful emperor; and save them always in peace through the
prayers of the Theotokos, and save us, O Christ God.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
The heavens opened on the imprisoned, all-radiant beams
in the heavens, radiating the all-pure cross on earth: Therefore,
accepting the radiance of its action, guiding us to the eternal
light, in our struggles we have it as an armor of peace, an
invincible victory.

799

Menologion - May

8

The Holy, Glorious, All-Praiseworthy Apostle
and Evangelist, Beloved of God and Virgin,
John the Theologian.
Troparion, Tone 2:

O beloved Apostle of Christ God, hasten to deliver a
helpless people. He on Whose breast you leaned, will accept
you as an intercessor. Entreat Him, O theologian, to also
disperse the darkness of pagans around us, and to grant us
peace and great mercy.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Who shall declare your greatness, O virgin disciple? For
you pour out wonders and streams of healing, praying for our
souls as theologian and friend of Christ.
Our Venerable Father Arsenius the Great (448).
Troparion of Arsenius, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: See page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
You arose out of Rome like a great sun; you came to
the imperial city most blessed one enlightening it by your
words and deeds. You banished the darkness of all ignorance.
Therefore we honor you, venerable Arsenius, the glory of the
fathers.
[Blessed Sister Miriam Teresa Demjanovich.]

800

Menologion - May

9

The Holy Prophet Isaiah.
The Holy Martyr Christopher (249).
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:

As we celebrate the memory of your prophet, Isaiah: see
page 548.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Adorned with clothes of blood, you stood before the Lord,
the King of Powers, Christopher ever-memorable, from where
you sang the Trisagion with awesome sweet-singing with
the bodiless powers and martyrs. Therefore, save your flock
through your prayers.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
Endowed with the gift of prophecy, O prophet martyr
Isaiah, herald of God, you explained to all the incarnation
of the Lord by loudly proclaiming the conclusion: Behold, a
Virgin shall conceive in her womb.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 8:
You performed the glorious feat of martyrdom, received
the crown of victory from God, O blessed Christopher, pray to
Him to deliver us from all trouble.

801

Menologion - May

The Translation of the precious Relics of our
Father among the saints Nicholas the
Wonderworker from Myra to Bari (1087).
Troparion, Tone 4:
The bright festive day has come, the city of Bari rejoices,
and the entire universe will exult with them in hymns and
spiritual songs: For today is the sacred celebration of the
translation of the honorable and much healing relics of the
bishop and wonderworker Nicholas. Like the never setting
sun shining with splendid rays, and dispersing the darkness
of temptations and troubles, from those who faithfully sing:
Save us great Nicholas.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
As a star goes from the East to the West, so do your
relics, O Hierarch Nicholas. The sea was consecrated with
your journey, and the city of Bari receives grace through you:
For you revealed to us works of a gracious, marvelous and
merciful wonderworker.

10

The Holy Apostle Simon the Zealot.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle Simon: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Known for teaching of wisdom, embedded in the souls
of the pious, let us bless Simon in praise, for he is spoken of
God; now he stands before the throne of glory and is glad with
the bodiless ones, praying unceasingly for all of us.
802

Menologion - May

11

The Foundation of Constantinople (330).
The Holy Priest-Martyr Mocius (250).
Troparion, Tone 4:

You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
You are armed with the shield of faith, you have destroyed
the army of the evil, O priest-martyr, and you have received
the crown of glory from Christ, O Mocius; therefore, you who
rejoice with the angels, save those who sing to you from their
troubles, praying incessantly for all of us.
The Holy Cyril and Methodius, Equals to the
Apostles, Teachers of the Slavs (9th Century).
[Our Holy Father and Confessor Basil Hopko
(1976).]
Troparion, Tone 4:
As equals of the apostles and teachers of the Slavs, O
Godly-wise Cyril and Methodius, pray to the Master of all,
to confirm all the Slavic people in true faith and oneness of
mind, to grant peace to the world, and to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Let us honor the two dedicated ones who enlightened us
by translating the divine scriptures. They poured out on us
the source of the knowledge of God, out of which knowledge
has abundantly been drawn even to this day. Let us bless you,
Cyril and Methodius, standing before the throne of the Most
High and warmly praying for our souls.
803

Menologion - May

12

Our Fathers among the saints Epiphanius, Bishop
of Cyprus (403) and Germanus, Patriarch of
Constantinople (740).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Let us faithful praise the two wonderful first bishops,
the divine Epiphanius and Germanus, for they put down the
infidel Pagans by presenting the wisest teachings to all, ever
singing in an orthodox manner the great mystery of piety.

13

The Holy Martyr Glyceria (141).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb Glyceria, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

O Glyceria, through your love for Mary, the Virgin and
Theotokos, you preserved your virginity inviolate. Aflame
with love for the Lord, you suffered in a difficult way, even up
to your death. Therefore, Christ God has crowned you with a
martyr’s crown, both for persevering for His sake and because
of your fervor.

14

The Holy Martyr Isidore (251).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Isidore, O Lord our God: see page 550.
804

Menologion - May

Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were revealed an outstanding guide for the whole
universe, O holy one, through your prayers to God. In like
manner, we sing to you today, O divinely-wise, most glorious
martyr Isidore.
Or this, Tone 3:
In your combat with the dragon, you gained the victory,
O martyr Isidore. As a radiant beacon from Egypt, you shone
forth to illumine all under the sun, advancing towards Him
Who shone forth from the Virgin Mother of God, for Whose
sake you were slain, O Passion-Bearer, offering yourself as a
fragrant sacrifice.

15

Our Venerable Father Pachomius the Great 		
(346).
Our Father among the saints Isaiah the
Wonder-worker, Bishop of Rostov (1090).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were revealed a shining lamp to the ends of the world.
You made the desert a city with a multitude of monks. You,
yourself, were crucified, bearing a cross on your shoulders
and you subdued the body through abstinence, praying
continually for all of us.

805

Menologion - May

16

Our Venerable Father Theodore the Consecrated,
Disciple of the Holy Pachomius (368).
Troparion, Tone 1:
You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

You flourished like a palm tree in the house of God,
bringing forth fruit of virtues to the Lord, through keeping
the fast, O venerable father. Therefore, you are also blessed as
equal in standing to the bodiless ones.

17

The Holy Apostle Andronicus and his Companions.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Andronicus: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

We praise Andronicus, the Apostle of Christ, the most
radiant star who enlightened the pagans with understanding
of God, and with them the wise Junias who labored with him,
crying out: Pray unceasingly to Christ God for all of us.

806

Menologion - May

18

The Holy Martyr Theodotus of Ancyra (303).
The Holy Martyrs Peter, Dionysius, and their 		
Companions (250).
The Holy Seven Virgins.
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Having struggled well in suffering, together with your
co-sufferers, O Theodotus, you received the crown of honor
with the honorable passion-bearing virgins. Therefore, pray
continually to Christ God for all of us.

19

The Holy Priest-Martyr Patrick, Bishop of Prusa
and his Companions (c. 362).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

As you are radiant with the goodness of the priesthood,
and adorned with the blood of martyrdom, O Patrick, standing
before Christ with those who suffered with you. Remember
us, for you are an honorable passion-bearer.
807

Menologion - May

20

The Holy Martyr Thaleleus (284).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Thaleleus, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Revealed as an arms-bearing passion-bearer of martyrs,
you were the perfect soldier of the King of Glory. By the
suffering and torture you endured, you brought down the
haughtiness of the idol worshippers. Therefore, we praise
your honorable memory, O wise Thaleleus.

21

The Holy Emperor Constantine (337) and his
Mother Helen (327), Equals to the Apostles.
Troparion, Tone 8:

Having beheld the image of Your cross in the heavens, and
like Paul, not receiving the call from men, Your Apostle among
emperors set Your hand ruling over the City [Constantinople]
which he always preserved in peace, through the prayers of
the Theotokos, O only Lover of Mankind.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today, Constantine and his mother Helena reveal the
cross, that most precious tree which puzzles the Jews. It is the
armor of Christian authorities against enemies. It has proved
itself awesome in war by its many miracles.
808

Menologion - May

22

The Holy Martyr Basiliscus (308).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Basiliscus, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

You were revealed mighty and courageous in suffering,
and a wonder-worker in working wonders, openly bearing the
Name of Christ, you put the torturer to shame. Therefore, we
honor you, O Basiliscus, ever crying out, O all-honored one:
Rejoice, bright adornment of martyrs.

23

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Michael, 		
Bishop of Synnada (818).
The Venerable Euphrosyne, Hegumena of the 		
Monastery of our Holy Savior in Polotsk (1173).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

As an all-honorable bishop and champion of piety, not
fearing the threats of the notorious one, you conquered his
heretical opposition, freely proclaiming in a loud voice:
I venerate the icons of Christ and His Immaculate Mother.
Therefore, we honor you, O Michael.
809

Menologion - May

24

Our Venerable Father Simeon, of the Wondrous
Mountain (596).
Our Venerable Father Nicetas the Stylite, the
Wonder-worker of Perejaslav.
Troparion, Tone 1:

You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Wishing for the highest, turning away from the lowest,
and building a pillar as if to heaven, you shone, therefore,
with the splendor of wonders, and continually pray to Christ,
the God of all, for all of us.

25

The Third Finding of the precious Head of the
Holy and Glorious Prophet, Forerunner,
and Baptist of the Lord, John.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Like a divine treasure hidden in the earth, Christ revealed
your head to us, O prophet and Forerunner. As we gather on
this discovery, we sing divinely inspired hymns in praise to the
Savior Who saves us from corruption through your prayers.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
Shining and divine pillar on earth, lamp of the sun, the
Forerunner has shown his light-bearing and divine head to
the ends of the earth. He sanctifies those who venerate it and
faithfully cry: O all-wise Baptist of Christ, save all of us.
810

Menologion - May

26

The Holy Apostle Carpus, one of the Seventy.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Carpus: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

The Church always sees you as a shining star, O Apostle
Carpus. Your wonders have been enlightened with abundant
gifts; save those in faith who honor your memory.

27

The Holy Priest-Martyr Therapontus [Bishop of
Sardis] (259).
Alleluia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

Having suffered under the law, O Therapontus, beloved
of Christ, you were revealed to be a true bishop and martyr.
Therefore, we pray you, O saint, now cure the unbearable
disease of passions and beseech Christ the Lover of Mankind
Who desires to ease our souls in His mercy.

811

Menologion - May

28

Our Venerable Father Nicetas, Bishop of Chalcedon
(836).
Alleluia, or the Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

You shone by the splendor of your deeds, O venerable
one. You became an heir of the apostolic throne, O Nicetas,
and you shone upon your flock like the sun, O father. Filled
with divine teaching we all cry out to you: Rejoice, O Catalyst
of Chalcedon.

29

The Holy Venerable Martyr and Virgin Theodosia (730).
Alleluia or the Troparion, Tone 4:

It was your pleasure to achieve virtue, O martyr, becoming
a pure dwelling of Christ, the beloved home of the Holy Spirit.
From where you shamed the enemy who fought against the
human race, you suffered well and cut down Copronymus
with the sword of faith, O Theodosia. You were presented
rejoicing to the heavenly bridal chamber; pray that great
mercy be given to those who faithfully honor you.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Through the difficulties of life you attained the easy, O
Martyr. With your blood you choked Copronymus, the defiled
enemy of the Church of Christ, and you rejoice with the
warriors on high, O All-blessed Theodosia, protecting those
who honor your memory.
812

Menologion - May

Or this, Tone 4:
Your divine memory, O Theodosia, rises today like a sun
on the world to recount your life. For by chastity you were set
free from the urges of the flesh and by the shedding of your
blood you became a bride of Christ. Therefore, deliver those
who praise you from all evil so that we may cry out to you:
Rejoice venerable mother.

30

Our Venerable Father Isaac, Hegumen of the
Dalmatian Monastery (383).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 552.
Kontakion, Tone 8:

As a faithful one pleasing to God, you burned with zeal
in the Church of Christ. You held the reins of Valens. You
predicted the captivity of the church and his terrible death to
him, O venerable one. Therefore, ever pray for us who honor
you, O venerable Isaac.

31

The Holy Apostle Hermes.
The Holy Martyr Hermeas (c. 160).
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Hermes: see page 548.
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Hermeas, O Lord our God: see page 550.
813

Menologion - May

Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 3:
You rose over the earth like a star, O blessed one, shining
with the light of the Sun from the all-radiant Paul that
enlightened the ends of the earth. For this reason, we honor
you, O Hermes.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 6:
Having wholeheartedly practiced asceticism for Christ,
you acquired courage as an old man, O martyr Hermeas.
Having trampled down the plots of the lawless by the power of
Christ, you remained unharmed from the drink of his sorcery,
crying out: God is with me and none are against me.
.

814

1

June
The Holy Martyr Justin the Philosopher and his
Companions (167).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.

Kontakion, Tone 2:
With the wisdom of your divine words, O Justin, the
whole Church of God is adorned, enlightening the world with
the radiance of your way of life. You received a crown by
pouring out your blood, and standing before Christ with the
angels, pray unceasingly for all of us.

2

Our Father among the saints Nicephorus the
Confessor (771).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.

Or this, Tone 8:
The grace of your deep words and lofty teaching has
become a ladder to virtue for us. You possessed a trumpet of
the spirit, O father, and by it you announce spiritual teaching.
You have taken up your abode in paradise, but still confound
enemies with the might of your words, O blessed Nicephorus,
beg Christ to forgive the sins of those who honor you.
815

Menologion - June

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Since you have received a crown of victory, O Nicephorus,
fom God in heaven, O most glorious one, as first bishop of
Christ and teacher, save those who faithfully honor you.

3

The Holy Martyr Lucillian and his Companions
(273).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

You approached the fire but were not burned, O courageous
and wise martyr Lucillian. You possessed the cooling dew of
God. You and your companions surpassed nature; therefore,
we ask all of you to remember us.

4

Our Father among the saints Metrophanes,
Bishop of Constantinople (325).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Or this, Tone 1:

In preaching the great mystery of the Trinity, you spread
the Word of Christ throughout the world. As the shepherd
of Christ’s flock, you drove off the spiritual wolves in their
816

Menologion - June

attack; you save from perdition all those who call on you.
Glory to Him Who gave you this might! Glory to Him Who
chose you! Glory to Him Who defends the true faith through
you!
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You clearly preached the faith of Christ, and by keeping
it you truly increased your faithful flock to a multitude.
Therefore, O Metrophanes, you rejoice with the angels,
unceasingly praying to Christ for all of us.

5

The Holy Priest-Martyr Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyre
(362).
The Holy Martyr Cosmas, Priest of Armenia.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Or this,  Tone 3:

Resplendent with heavenly belief, you made a sacrifice
of yourself to God. In suffering martyrdom for the Immortal
King, you have inherited the heavenly palace. O venerable
father Dorotheus, in your joy pray to Christ to have mercy on
all of us.
Kontakion, Tone 5:
With virtues, divine learning and suffering radiating more
than the sun, O blessed one, you enlightened the earth, O
Dorotheus, dispelling the darkness of polytheism and cruel
heresies. Therefore, we brightly celebrate your memory.
817

Menologion - June

6

Our Venerable Father Bessarion the Wonder-worker
(446).
Our Venerable Father Hilarion the New, Hegumen
of the Dalmatian Monastery, the Confessor
(845).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 552.
Kontakion of Bessarion, Tone 2:

Imitating the powers of heaven, O venerable father, you
lived a soaring life like a bird, flying upward with unquenchable
desire to Christ the King until you reached Him. O Bessarion,
pray unceasingly for all of us.
Kontakion of Hilarion, Tone 2:
Like a shepherd you built a life-bearing fence in your
pasture and protected your flock unharmed, and you were
revealed great deeds from on high, O Hilarion the New. Let
us accept the many torments and travails according to piety.
Because you were inducted into the all-joyful life on Mount
Zion: pray for us, O venerable one.

7

The Holy Priest-Martyr Theodotus, Bishop of Ancyra
(303).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
818

Menologion - June

Kontakion, Tone 1:
Enlightening creation with miracles and sufferings, you
were truly a star of light, O blessed Theodotus. Celebrating
your famous memory today, we praise Christ with a heart full
of joy.

8

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy Great
Martyr Theodore the Recruit (319).
Troparion, Tone 4:

You became a truly brilliant general in the armies of the
King of heaven, O Theodore the Triumphant. You fought
courageously with the weapons of faith and put the legions
of demons to flight. Therefore, we praise you with fervor at
all times.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
O Theodore, pride of martyrs, you put on the armor of faith
and took the Word of God as a spear to vanquish the enemy.
In the company of the martyrs, do not cease to intercede with
Christ God in behalf of all of us.

9

Our Father among the saints Cyril, Archbishop
of Alexandria (444).
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
819

Menologion - June

Or this, Tone 3:
Your words reveal a treasure of theology for the world,
and they crushed the blasphemy of Nestor. You defended
the true glory of the Theotokos, O father Cyril. Now pray to
Christ to have mercy on us.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
O blessed Cyril, you openly poured out the depth of the
teachings of theology over us, drowning heresies from the
well-spring of the Savior, and saving your flock unharmed
from triple waves. O venerable one, you were the guide
revealing divine things for all the world.

10

The Holy Priest-Martyr Timothy, Bishop of Prusa
[Bithynia] (362).
Troparion,  Tone 1:

Today, the whole world rejoices in radiance, and the
assembly of the faithful sings to your memory. With them,
we solemnly celebrate in your memory and cry out: Save us
from all misfortune, O priest-martyr Timothy, through your
prayers.
Kontakion, Tone 5:
Washed by the rivers of your own blood, O priest-martyr
of the Lord Timothy, you offered the fruit of your heart to
Christ from the earth. You received in return an unending
abundance from God. Therefore, we pray to you to deliver
from misfortune those who keep your memory.
820

Menologion - June

11

The Holy Apostles Bartholomew and Barnabas.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy apostles: see page 548.
Or this, Tone 1:
Receiving the Spirit as He came in fiery tongues, you
preached the coming of the Word in the flesh. While one of
you was beheaded for the Gospel, the other endured stoning
for the sake of the faith. You have been sent to adorn the
choirs of heaven, O Bartholomew and Barnabas. We honor
your memory and ask that you intercede with God to forgive
our sins.
Kontakion of Bartholomew, Tone 4:
You were revealed as the great sun of the universe. Your
awesome miracles have manifested great enlightenment,
guiding those who honor you by light, O Bartholomew,
Apostle of the Lord.
Kontakion of Barnabas, Tone 3:
You were a faithful servant of the Lord in everything,
and out of the seventy Apostles you appeared first, and with
Paul you shone with your preaching, proclaiming Christ the
Savior to all; therefore, with hymns we celebrate your divine
memory, O Barnabas.

821

Menologion - June

12

Our Venerable Father Onuphrius the Great
(400).
Our Venerable Father Peter of Athos (734).
Troparion, Onuphrius, Tone 4:

God of our fathers: see page 549.
Or this, Tone 1:
You entered the desert, being led by spiritual yearning, O
God-wise Onuphrius, and you fought in it for many years like
a bodiless one. You are the equal of the Prophet Elijah and of
the Baptist, and you were delighted by the Sacred Mysteries
ministered by angel hands. Now that you have gone to them
in the light of the Holy Trinity, pray for us who honor your
memory.
Troparion of Peter, Tone 8:
The mountain of Athos rejoices, inviting all the monastic
choirs to praise you. We join them in singing to your memory,
O venerable Peter, and honoring you we pray: Ask for peace
in the world and great mercy for our souls from Christ God.
Kontakion of Onuphrius, Tone 3:
Enlightened by the light of the most Holy Spirit, O wise in
God, you already left the life of rumors. You have reached the
desert, O venerable father. You rejoiced in God, the Creator,
Who is over all. Therefore, Christ, the Great Giver of gifts,
glorified you, O blessed one.

822

Menologion - June

Kontakion of Peter, Tone 2:
Having removed yourself from human cohabitation, you
have even lived in caves of stone, with the divine desire and
love of your Lord, O Peter, from Whom you have received
your crown. Pray unceasingly for all of us to be saved.

13

The Holy Martyr Aquilina (293).
The Holy Triphyllus, Bishop of Leucosia [Nicosia]
on Cyprus (370).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb Aquilina, O Jesus: see page 553.
Troparion of the Hierarch, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 2:

With the goodness of your virginity and pre-purified
soul, you flowed to the height of martyrdom, O all-honorable
Aquilina, when you were wounded with love for your
bridegroom Christ, with Whom you gladly stand among the
angels. Do not cease praying with them for all of us.
Kontakion of the Hierarch, Tone 8:
With the respectable way of life you accepted the purity
of virginity, O Tryphyllius, you were shown to be the firstenthroned of Leucosia. You were revealed to them as a
prophet and intelligent guide. For this reason we cry out to
you: Rejoice, O adorned hierarch.

823

Menologion - June

14

The Holy Prophet Elisha.
Our Holy Father Methodius, Patriarch of
Constantinople (847).
Troparion of the Prophet,  Tone 4:

An angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, and
the second foreruner of Christ, the glorious Elijah from on
high sent grace to Elisha to cure sicknesses and cleanse lepers.
He likewise overflows with healing for those who honor him.
Troparion of the Hierarch,  Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Or this, Tone 4:
Burning with zeal for the holy icons, O most wise saint,
you boldly opposed the malice of the king. You were locked
in a tomb and suffered torment, and for your labors you were
exiled. Do not forget us who sing of your fame, O most blessed
pastor Methodius.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
You were revealed a prophet of God, receiving augmented
grace truly worthy of you, for you were a contemporary with
Elijah, O blessed Elisha. Pray unceasingly with him to Christ
God for all of us.
Kontakion of the Hierarch, Tone 2:
You practiced asceticism on earth as if without flesh,
O Methodius, and you inherited heaven for explaining the
veneration of icons to the end. Although you continued
laboring more for the sick, you did not stop boldly accusing
those blotting out the icons of Christ.
824

Menologion - June

15

The Holy Prophet Amos.
The Venerable Jerome, Priest of Stridonium (420).
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate the memory: see page 548.
Troparion of Jerome, Tone 8:

Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 4:
O Prophet, the Spirit purified your splendid heart, O
glorious Amos, and receiving the gift of prophecy from on
high, You cried with a loud voice to all the nations: This is our
God, and there is none beside Him.
Kontakion of Jerome, Tone 3:
Delighting in purity, O wise-in-God, you repressed the
urges of the flesh. You glowed with faith and bloomed like an
orchard in paradise, O priest and father Jerome.

16

Our Holy Father and Wonder-worker Tychon, Bishop
of Amathis (c. 425).
Troparion, Tone 1:
You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
Or this, Tone 4:

You first crucified yourself to the world by becoming
poor among the living. Then like a true shepherd, you put
your life at the disposal of your flock. Enriching your sheep
825

Menologion - June

with miracles, you became a bright light for the Church of
Amathis. By shedding light on it, you saved it from the fog of
deceit, O father Tychon. Through your prayers enlighten us
today as we praise you.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
O Holy One, you became God-beloved through fasting;
you received power from the Comforter on high to destroy the
idol of temptation, to save people, to cast out demons, and to
heal the infirm: Therefore, we honor you as the friend of God,
O blessed Tychon.

17

The Holy Martyrs Manuel, Sabel, and Ishmael
(c. 633).
Our Venerable Father Hypatius, Hegumen of the 		
Rufenianos Monastery.
Troparion,  Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Because of your perfect faith in Christ, O all-blessed
ones, and having drank this cup in faith you renounced
Persian service and boldness on earth, equal in number with
the Trinity, praying for us at all times.

18

The Holy Martyr Leontius (c. 73).

Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Leontius, O Lord our God: see page 550.
826

Menologion - June

Kontakion, Tone 3:
You shamed the torturers as having evil tricks, and you
exposed the service of the Pagans as godless. You showed
the reason of God into all mankind through your teaching of
piety, O Godly-wise martyr. Therefore, we lovingly honor
your memory, O all-wise Leontius.

19

The Holy Apostle Jude, Brother of the Lord
according to the flesh.
Troparion, Tone 1:

Knowing you as the relative of Christ, O Jude, we praise
you as a firm martyr, O dedicated one. You preserved the
faith by trampling down temptation. Therefore, today, as we
celebrate your all-holy memory, through your prayers, may
we receive remission of sins.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
You were revealed a chosen disciple for your firmness of
mind, and an unshakeable pillar of the church of Christ. You
preached the word of Christ to the nations, telling them to
believe in one divinity. Being glorified by Him, you received
the gift of healing, to heal those infirm coming to you, O allpraised Apostle Jude.

827

Menologion - June

20

The Holy Priest-Martyr Methodius, Bishop of Patara
(311).
Troparion,  Tone 1:

Your blood, O wise one, quietly cries out from the
earth, like Abel to God, O Godly-wise bishop Methodius.
You clearly preached the incarnation of God; therefore, also
putting the flattery of Origen to shame, you were translated to
the heavenly bridal chamber. Pray to Christ God that He may
save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
As a server of the sacred mysteries of the Holy Trinity,
and as a preacher of the divine commandments beyond
comprehension, you were the confirmation of the true faith,
O Methodius. You denounced heretical ideas; you poured out
your blood as a priest-martyr for the sake of the true faith.
Standing before Christ with the angels, pray to save us.

21

The Holy Martyr Julian of Tarsus (290).
Troparion,  Tone 4:
Your martyr O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

Today, let us all worthily praise Julian, a pious invincible
warrior, seeker of truth and armorer, and cry out to him: Pray
to Christ God for all of us.
828

Menologion - June

22

The Holy Martyr Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata
(379).
Troparion,  Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

You lived piously as a bishop, and followed the path to
martyrdom. You put out the fire of sacrifice to idols, O holy
hierarch Eusebius. As you have boldness before Christ God,
pray to Him that our souls be saved.

23

The Holy Martyr Agrippina (275).
Troparion,  Tone 4:
Your lamb Agrippina, O Jesus: see page 553.
Or this, Tone 4:

You were overcome with love of the heavenly Lord and
turned from the world and the care of the flesh. You endured
the afflictions imposed upon you, saying: receive me into
Your love, O Christ, King of ages, for I am being consumed
for You. Make those who honor you happy in his mercy, O
most praiseworthy martyr Agrippina.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Your light-bearing asceticism draws near with light today,
on which the divine Church honors them, summoning all
joyfully to cry out to you: Rejoice, O all-honorable virgin
martyr Agrippina.
829

Menologion - June

24

THE NATIVITY OF THE HONORABLE,
GLORIOUS PROPHET, FORERUNNER,
AND BAPTIST OF THE LORD, JOHN.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Prophet and Forerunner of the coming of Christ, although
we honor you with love, we cannot give you worthy praise.
Through your glorious and holy birth, your mother was freed
from barrenness and your father from the loss of speech, and
the incarnation of the Son of God is proclaimed to the world.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Today she who once was barren gives birth to Christ’s
Forerunner. He himself is the fulfillment of all prophecy; for
in the Jordan, he imposed his hand upon the Word of God
Whom the prophets had foretold and was shown to be His
prophet, herald, and Forerunner.

25

The Holy Venerable Martyr Febronia (310).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb Febronia, O Jesus: see page 553.
Or this, Tone 8:

First you crucified yourself for the world through silence,
then the world was crucified for you when you entered the
feat of martyrdom. Therefore we sing to you, because you
received a crown from Christ, O Febronia, glorious martyr.
830

Menologion - June

Kontakion, Tone 6:
My bridegroom O sweetest Christ, cried Febronia, it is
not difficult for me to follow You. The sweetness of Your
love gives my soul wings of hope, and the beauty of Your
mercy sweetens my heart. May I drain the cup of suffering
in imitation of You, that You may find me worthy with the
wise virgins to dance for You in the bridal chamber. Therefore
venerable passion-bearer, honoring your ascetic labors, we
pray to you: Pray that we not find the doors of the bridal
chamber locked to us.

26

Our Venerable Father David of Thessalonica (540).
Troparion, Tone 8:
In you, O father: see page 550.
Or this, Tone 4:

Drowning out the noises of the world with hymns, you
took up your abode in a tree in the midst of an orchard, O
father. In your heart you left the world and ascended into
heaven by your good works. There you have taken up your
abode with angels. O David, look down on us who keep your
memory.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
Like an ever-blooming garden, offering the fruits of
virtues, you revealed yourself like a sweet-singing bird in a
tree of the garden. More than paradise, you accepted the Tree
of Life of the Lord in your heart, for having cultivated it, O
Godly-wise One, through which you give nourishment to us
by grace: Ever pray for us David, all blessed one.
831

Menologion - June

27

Our Venerable Father Sampson the Hospitaller (530).
Troparion, Tone 8:

O venerable father, you reaped your reward by your
patience, unceasing prayer, loving, and helping the poor. O
blessed, merciful Sampson, continue praying to Christ God to
save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
As you are a superior physician and well-received
intercessor, we are gathering at your divine shrine, O Godlywise venerable Sampson. Having come together with love,
rejoicing in Psalms and hymns, let us glorify Christ Who
granted you such a grace of healing.

28

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy 		
Unmercenary Physicians Cyrus and John (412).
[The Translation of the Relics of the Holy PriestMartyr Theodore Romzha, Bishop of
Mukačevo (2003).]
Troparion, Tone 5:

O Christ God, through the wonders of Your holy martyrs,
You have given us an invincible rampart. Through their prayers
disperse the council of the pagans, strengthen the rule of the
kingdom, for You alone are good and the Lover of Mankind.

832

Menologion - June

Kontakion: Tone 3:
Having received the gift of the divine grace of miracles,
O holy ones, you unceasingly work wonders in the world; you
remove all our sufferings invisibly by the work of your hands,
O God-wise Cyrus together with glorious John; you are truly
divine physicians.

29

THE HOLY GLORIOUS, ALL-PRAISEWORTHY PRE-EMINENT APOSTLES
PETER AND PAUL.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Leaders of the apostles, teachers of the world, intercede
with the Lord of All to grant peace to the world and abundant
mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Lord,
You
have
received your steadfast
and inspired preachers, the
foremost of your apostles,
into the enjoyment of Your
good gifts and repose. You
preferred their sufferings
and death above any
sacrifice. For You alone
know the secrets of the
heart.

833

Menologion - June

30

The Synaxis of the Holy, Glorious and AllPraiseworthy Twelve Apostles.
Troparion, Tone 4:

Leaders of the apostles: see above.
Or this, Tone 8:
Your preaching has spread over the whole earth, because
you have received the Spirit in flaming tongues. You burned
down the lies of idolatry, and you have caught the straying
people with the model of faith. The heavens declare your
glory for this, and the firmament proclaims your works. We
join them in a song to your memory: through the prayers of
Your twelve apostles, save us, O God.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Today the rock of Christ brightly glorifies both the rock
of faith, the highest ranked of the disciples, and with Paul
the whole assembly of the twelve. faithfully celebrating their
memory, let us glorify the One Who glorified them.

834

1

July
The Holy Unmercenary Healers and
Wonder-workers Cosmas and Damian (284).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Today the people sing to God on high because He gave us
doctors who practiced without fee. Let us sing to Cosmas and
Damian: Since you have been given the gift of grace to cure,
give it freely among all who honor your memory.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Having received the grace of healing, you extend healing
to those in need, O glorious wonder-working physicians. But
through your visitation put down the insolence of warriors,
granting healing to the world through your wonders.
or the troparion and kontakion, see page 665.

2

The Deposition of the Precious Robes of our
most holy Lady, the Theotokos at [the church
of] Blachernae [Constantinople] (c. 465).
Troparion, Tone 8:
O Ever-Virgin Theotokos, protectress of mankind, you
835

Menologion - July

have given a majestic blessing to your city. The robe and
sash of your immaculate body remained incorrupt throughout
your seedless child-bearing: For time and nature are renewed
through you. Therefore, let us pray to you: Grant peace to
your city and great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
O Pure One, full of the grace of God, you bestowed your
sacred robe with which you covered your holy body as a
garment of incorruption to all the faithful. O protection of all
mankind, let us lovingly celebrate its covering, and let us cry
aloud to you in awe: Rejoice, O virgin, praise of Christians.

3

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth (108).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Hyacinth, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 6:

A tree of life of Your faith in the midst of his soul, O
Christ, guards Your martyr to be the most honorable in Your
Garden of Eden, a tree that fearlessly destroyed the serpent of
temptation by the spirit, being crowned in Your glory, great
in mercy.

836

Menologion - July

4

Our Father among the saints Andrew of Jerusalem,
Archbishop of Crete (740).
Our Venerable Martha, Mother of our Venerable
Father Simeon of the Wondrous Mountain (551).
Troparion of Andrew, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you: see page 549.
Or this,  Tone 1:

You elevated the Church of Christ with your beautiful
hymns showing in theology the glory of the Holy Trinity.
Therefore, O Andrew, shepherd of Crete, we sing of you as
a mystical speaker, and we extol your memory glorifying the
friend of Christ among His saints.
and of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
Or this, Tone 4:
By your love for the Theotokos and a holy life you were
graced to give birth to a child of light for the world. This child
was radiant with the light of the Trinity. Therefore, we ask you
to prey unceasingly for all of us.
Kontakion of Andrew, Tone 2:
Having clearly trumpeted divine sweet-singing, you were
revealed a bright lamp for the world, shining with the light of
the Trinity, O venerable Andrew. Therefore, let us cry to you:
do not cease praying for all of us.
837

Menologion - July

Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 2:
Standing before the Lord in prayer, offering songs and
praise to the immaculate virgin Theotokos, O pure Martha,
you gave birth to a sacred child, the most wondrous Simeon,
beacon to the entire world: With him ever pray for all of us.

5

Our Venerable Father Athanasius of Athos
(1003).
Troparion, Tone 3:

While in the flesh, by your way of life, you were admired
by the angelic ranks. With a body you went out against the
invisible webs, O ever-glorious one, and wounded the demonic
regiments. Therefore, O Athanasius, Christ rewarded you with
rich gifts. Therefore, O Father, pray to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
As the immaterial existence is tolerable to the spectator
and the active teller of all that is true, your flock appeals to
you, O preacher of God. Do not weaken prayers for your
servants to be delivered from dangers and visitations, who
sing to you: Rejoice, O father Athanasius.

6

Our Venerable Father Sisoes the Great (c. 429).

Troparion, Tone 1:
You made the wilderness your dwelling: see page 639.
838

Menologion - July

Or this, Tone 2:
Having overcome carnal desires by abstinence, you
crucified yourself to the world. You leveled all lust by living
in the desert, and became like an angel on earth. This is why
we acclaim you as a guide for monks, father Sisoes, and beg
you: implore Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having struggled ascetically, you were seen as an angel
on earth, O venerable one, ever enlightening the thoughts of
the faithful with divine signs: Therefore, we honor you with
faith, O Sisoes.

7

Our Venerable Fathers Thomas of Maleum and
Acacius, mentioned in “The Ladder.”
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
Or this, Tone 1:

Thomas is radiant in his miracles, and Acacius has
become famous for his obedience. They shine as lights for
the world and guiding stars for monks. We have recourse to
you as favorities of God to defend us in battle through your
prayers so that we might ask Christ to forgive our sins since
we honor your memory.
Kontakion of Thomas, Tone 4:
You courageously showed a great victory, inflamed with
839

Menologion - July

divine love. You spurned the mortal king and all earthly
beauty, completing your worldly travels on Mount Malea,
from where you went up to Heaven to the King of kings, O
Thomas, pray unceasingly for all of us.
Kontakion of Acacius, Tone 2:
From childhood, most holy and venerable Acacius, you
followed after Christ, forsaking the world. Imitating His
willing meekness, you overcame the proud torturer. Now pray
unceasingly for all of us.

8

The Holy Great Martyr Procopius (303).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord: see page 550.
Or this, Tone 8:

Receiving heaven’s invitation, O holy one, you turned
from the errors of your ancestors and their ancient ways to
be zealous for Christ like Paul. You endured many tortures
and wounds, and you have been repaid with a crown of glory.
Therefore, pray to Christ to save us, O great martyr Procopius.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Set ablaze by divine zeal for Christ, and protected by the
might of the cross, Procopius, you cast down the insolence and
boldness of the enemy! You raised up an honorable Church,
excelling in faith and giving light to all of us!

840

Menologion - July

9

The Holy Martyr Pancratius, Bishop of Taormina.
Troparion,  Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 8:

Like an arrow on fire, you were armed at Taormina to kill
the godless and to bring light to the faithful. You strengthened
them in the faith by your preaching, and you finished your
work by spilling your blood. O martyred priest Pancratius,
pray for your flock and for all who cherish your memory.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were revealed as a brilliant star, O Pancratius, for the
people of Taormina. You were shown also to be a sufferer for
Christ. Since you now stand before Him, O blessed one, pray
for those who honor you.

10

The Holy Forty-five Martyrs in Nicopolis in Armenia
(319).
Troparion, Tone 1:

You were united in mind and spirit O forty-five holy
sufferers, as you opposed the enemy. You proved victorious
and received crowns from Christ God, and the eternal reward
for your martyrdom. Pray that we also may attain them as we
honorably extol you with songs.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
O Martyrs, you have undergone many torments for the
sake of Christ and you have cut down all the idols to the many
841

Menologion - July

gods. You have destroyed every temptation of atheism and
you have corrected this by the power of Christ: Teach us all to
truly openly sing: Alleluia.
Our Venerable Father Anthony of the Monastery
of the Caves of Kiev (1073).
The holy martyred brothers Francis, Mutius,
Raphael, and their Companions, martyred
in Damascus (1860).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Having departed from worldly clamor, you left the world
and followed Christ according to the Gospel. You reached the
quiet refuge of the Holy Mountain of Athos, living there a
life equal-of-the-angels. With the blessing of the fathers, you
came to the hills of Kyiv. There, having fulfilled a life loving
of labors, you illumined your homeland. Having shown a
multitude of monastics the pathway leading to the heavenly
kingdom, you led them to Christ. Beseech Him, O venerable
Anthony, that He may save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Loving Him from your childhood, you surrendered
yourself to God and followed Him with all your heart and
soul, O venerable one. Scorning the passing corruption of the
world, you made a cave in the earth, and in it you struggled
against the unseen snares of the enemy. You illumined the ends
of the earth as a light-radiating sun. Therefore, with rejoicing,
you went over to the heavenly chambers. And now, standing
with the angels before the throne of the Master, remember us
who honor your memory that we may cry out to you: Rejoice,
Anthony our father.
842

Menologion - July

11

The Holy Most Praiseworthy Martyr, Euphemia
(451).
The Passing of Blessed Olga, Princess of Kiev,
named Helen at Holy Baptism (969).
[In Benedictine communities: The Translation of
the Relics of our Holy Father Benedict.]
Troparion, Tone 4:

Having loved Christ your Bridegroom, and having
prepared your bright lamp, you shone with virtues, O allpraised Euphemia. Therefore, you went in with Him to the
wedding, having received from Him a crown of suffering.
Deliver us, who in faith are honoring your memory, from
misfortunes.
Troparion, Tone 1:
Having fixed your mind with the wings of divine
understanding, you flew to Him Who surpasses the visible
creation. Having sought the God and Creator of All, and having
found Him, you received birth again by baptism. Satisfying
yourself of the tree of life, you abide forever incorrupt, O
ever-glorious Olga.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
You underwent struggles both in martyrdom and in faith
for Christ your Bridegroom. Now beseech the Master to
subjugate underfoot the shaking of the enemies of the faithful,
as He did for the six hundred and thirty God-bearing fathers,
accepting the definition of faith and preserving it, O allpraised One.
843

Menologion - July

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Today, let us sing the praises of God the Benefactor of this
world, who exalted the God-wise Olga in the land of Rus’. By
her prayers, may He grant remission of sin to our souls.

12

The Holy Martyrs Proclus and Hilarion.
Our Venerable Father Michael of Malein
(3rd Century).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 2:

The choirs of angels looked down and were amazed by
your sufferings. By your flesh you vanquished the invisible
power of the enemy, O holy ones, and speared him by the
power of the cross. Pray for us in our need, O Proclus and
Hilarion, that we too may conquer the enemy and save our
souls.
Troparion of Michael, Tone 8:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 550.
Or this, in the same tone:
Having soared on mental wings to a vision of God, you
left behind all the noises of the world, O blessed saint. You
despised all the explanations according to the flesh but sought
the wisdom from on high. You present yourself as a model for
all of us, saying: it is a good thing to live with God.
844

Menologion - July

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Like the morning star, your glorious sufferings enlighten
us with holy miracles. We celebrate your memory, Proclus
and Hilarion: Pray to God for us that He will save our souls.
Kontakion of Michael, Tone 2:
Your deeds purified the burden of the flesh, and your
enlightenment quickly plumbed the spirit, O Michael; and you
are revealed as a domicile hospitable for the Trinty, because of
your clear perception. Pray unceasingly for all of us.

13

The Synaxis of the Holy Archangel Gabriel.
Our Venerable Father Stephen the Sabbaite [of
the Saint Sabbas Monastery] (794).
Our Father among the saints Julian, Bishop of
Kenoman.
Troparion of the Archangel, Tone 4:

Leaders of the heavenly armies, although we are unworthy,
we always beseech you to fortify us through your prayers and
to shelter us beneath the wings of your sublime glory. Watch
over us who bow to you and cry out fervently: deliver us from
danger, for you are the commanders of the powers on high.
Or this, in the same tone:
O people, with a candlelight assembly let us sing the
praises of the leader of heaven’s hosts. He is the servant of
light sent from the Light divine to enlighten all who sing
with love: O Gabriel, leader of the angels, rejoice with all the
powers of heaven.
845

Menologion - July

Troparion of the Venerable, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion of the Archangel, Tone 2:
Seeing God in glory in the heavens, granting grace upon
earth from on high, O wise leader of angels, Gabriel, servant
of the glory of God, and divine defender of the world, save
and keep those who cry out to you; be our helper so that no
one defeats us.
Kontakion of the Venerable, Tone 4:
You sought the very depth of wisdom, O Stephen, and
great was your joy when you found that precious pearl. You
found understanding in your infirmities, most blessed Stephen.

14

The Holy Apostle Aquila.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostle Aquila: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Glorious Aquila, Apostle of the Lord, the Church, having
acquired you like a great sun, enlightens with the splendors of
your teaching those who honor you with faith.

846

Menologion - July

15

The Holy Martyrs Cyricus and Julitta his mother
(304).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 8:
As a fertile vine, honorable Julitta, you offered to God a
mature fruit, your son, the glorious Cyricus, who was adorned
richly by martyrdom, and filled by your blood. Therefore, the
highest reward was given to you in the highest. Remember us
who sing to you, O valiant martyrs.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Martyrs for Christ, Julitta and Cyricus, you were carried
into the embrace of the Father. Undergoing the brave ascetic
feats, you joyfully cried out: Christ is the praise of martyrs.
The Holy Great Prince Vladimir, Equal to the
Apostles, named Basil at Holy Baptism (1015).
Troparion, Tone 4:
You were like the merchant who sought the fine pearl, O
Vladimir. Distinguished in your rule and seated on the high
throne of Kyiv, the Mother of Cities, which has been saved by
God. Sending envoys to the Royal City to investigate the true
faith and put it to the test, you found Christ the Pearl without
price, Who chose you as a second Paul, and Who shook off
your blindness of soul and body in the holy font. Therefore,
we your people are here celebrating your falling asleep. Pray
that our authorities and God-loving people may be saved.
847

Menologion - July

Kontakion, Tone 8:
O all glorious Vladimir, in old age you imitated the great
Apostle Paul. You abandoned striving after idols as childish
wisdom, and as a fully grown man you adorned yourself with
the purple of divine baptism. Now standing before Christ the
Savior with rejoicing, pray that the leaders of Rus’ be saved
with those entrusted to them.

16

The Holy Priest-Martyr Athenogenes, [Bishop of
Sebaste,] and his Ten Disciples (311).

Troparion, Tone 8:
The holy Athenogenes offered his ten disciples like
a sacrifice to God. The shepherd and his sheep entered the
heavenly fold. By their work they vanquished the lies of
the pagans. O Christ God, save your flock from the wolves
through the prayer of your martyrs.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Priest-martyr Athenogenes, following the words of the
Master, as an excellent pastor you laid down your life for the
sheep of Christ. Therefore, we praise you, together with your
ten disciples who suffered with you, who were led by the fear
of God and your instruction. With His life-originating right
hand the Master has crowned you, for you were well-pleasing
to Him: Pray to Him for all of us.
Memory of the Holy Fathers of the First Six
Ecumenical Councils.
[If July 16 is a Sunday, we commemorate the Holy
Six Ecumenical Councils, If not, we commemorate the
memory of the Holy Fathers of the Six Ecumenical
Councils on the Sunday from July 13 to July 19]
848

Menologion - July

Troparion, Tone 8:
O Christ our God, You are above all praise. You have
established our fathers as beacons on the earth, leading us all to
the true faith through them. O most merciful Lord, glory to You!
Kontakion, Tone 8:
The preaching of the apostles and the teachings of the
Fathers have confirmed the one faith of the Church, which she
wears as the garment of truth, woven from the theology on
high, as she faithfully imparts and glorifies the great mystery
of devotion.

17

The Holy Great Martyr Marina.

[Our Holy Father and Confessor Paul Gojdič,
		
Bishop of Prešov (1960).]
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your lamb, Marina, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion, Tone 3:
Virgin and martyr Marina, you were adorned with the
goodness of virginity and crowned with incorruptible crowns.
You were soaked with the blood of martyrdom and were
glorified by your miracles of healing. Piously, you received
the prize of victory for your suffering.
[Troparion of Blessed Paul, Tone 4:]
[From your youth you loved Christ, the eternal Word. You
desired to serve Him quietly and in simplicity of heart, but the
right hand of the Most High chose you for the bishop’s throne,
and made you a steadfast shepherd of His people. For the sake
849

Menologion - July

of faith and the unity of the Church, you offered yourself to
God as a perfect sacrifice. O Father and Priest-Martyr Paul,
pray to Christ our God for the salvation of our souls.]
[Kontakion of the Blessed Paul, Tone 4:]
[Enkindled with divine love, you have shone upon us like
a star of surpassing brilliance, for we have come to know you
as a zealous hierarch of our Church. Therefore praising your
most honored memory, we offer gratitude to God for you; O
holy hierarch Paul, our father, you teach us by your word: God
is love! Let us love him.]

18

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth of Amastris (4th Century).
The Holy Martyr Emilian (362).
Troparion,  Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

Burning with zeal for God, you did not dread the fire,
but freely ascending without fear. You were consumed by the
flames, offering yourself to the Master as a sacrifice. Glorious
martyr Emilian: Pray to Christ God that He may grant us great
mercy.

19

Our Venerable Mother Macrina, Sister of Basil the
Great (379).
Our Venerable Father Dios (430).
Troparion of Macrina,  Tone 8:
In you, O mother, the divine image: see page 554.
850

Menologion - July

Or this, Tone 2:
You saw your bridegroom die and were struck by the
vanity of this world and its fleeting life. Taking purpose in
your life, you were betrothed to the Immortal One. You drew
His love with fasting and humility. Now your spirit rejoices
with the angels, O venerable Macrina.
Troparion of Dios,  Tone 1:
In you, O father, the divine image: see page 552.
Kontakion of Macrina, Tone 4:
Venerable Macrina, you loved the good God with all
your heart. Taking His precious cross upon your shoulder,
you followed after Him with zeal. Therefore, you have found
forgiveness of sins.
Kontakion of Dios, Tone 2:
Our wonder-working father Dios, having divinely armed
yourself by purity of soul, and become strong as a spear by
continuous prayer, you have dispersed regiments of demons:
Pray unceasingly for all of us.

20

THE HOLY AND GLORIOUS PROPHET ELIJAH.
Troparion, Tone 4:

An angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, and
the second Forerunner of Christ, the glorious Elijah from on
high sent grace to Elisha to cure sicknesses and cleanse lepers.
He likewise overflows with healing for those who honor him.

851

Menologion - July

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Prophet and seer of the mighty deeds of our God, renowned
Elijah, you stopped the rain clouds by a word. Intercede for us
with the only One Who loves mankind.

21

Our Venerable Father Simeon, Fool for Christ, and
his fellow Ascetic John (590).
The Holy Prophet Ezekiel.
Troparion of the Venerables, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 553.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate: see page 548.
Or this, Tone 2:

O prophet of God, Ezekiel, through the gift of the Spirit
you saw the sealed door of the Word’s entrance. Beg Him to
open the doors of His mercy to us and save the souls of those
who honor your memory.
Kontakion of the Venerables, Tone 2:
In the flesh you were revealed as bodiless, and shone
forth as the most serene benefactor. Let us praise the equal-to
-the-angels and God-bearing Simeon, and with him the evermemorable John in faith and love, for unceasingly praying to
the Lord for all of us.
Kontakion of Ezekiel, Tone 4:
O wondrous Ezekiel, you were revealed a prophet of God,
proclaiming to all the incarnation of the Lord, the Lamb and
852

Menologion - July

Creator, the Son of God Who has ever revealed himself.

22

The Holy Myrrh-bearer Mary Magdalene, Equal
to the Apostles.
The Translation of the Relics of the Holy Priest
Martyr Phocas (13th Century).
Troparion of Mary, Tone 1:

Keeping His statutes and laws, honorable Mary
Magdalene, you followed Christ Who was born for us from the
Virgin. Therefore, today, celebrating your all holy memory, let
us receive remission of sins through your prayers.
Troparion of Phocas, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion of Mary, Tone 3:
Standing before the cross of the Savior with many others,
and suffering with the mother of the Lord, and with tears
flowing, the most glorious Mary offered praise saying: What
is this strange wonder? The Creator of all creation chooses to
suffer. Glory to Your mighty power.
Kontakion of Phocas, Tone 6:
As a hierarch bringing an offering, O father, you offered
yourself as a living offering at the end. Having lawfully
witnessed to Christ God, strengthened by an angel and willing
death, you are with those who sing to you: Come, O Phocas,
be with us, and no one will be against us.
853

Menologion - July

23

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus and Theophilus, and
their Companions (4th Century).
[Repose of our Holy Father Basil Hopko, Bishop of
Medila (1976).]
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Or this, in the same tone:

O martyrs, you entered the tribunal of the unbelievers like
true soldiers on a grave mission. You suffered many torments
for the sake of the faith, professing Christ with fortitude.
Intercede with Christ for all we need.
Kontakion, Tone 1:
You embraced all your suffering with heroic stance, and
you were arrayed with glory, O blessed saint. You turned a
wolf into a lamb by divine grace and inspired him to join
you in your martyrdom. For this we praise you, O glorious
Trophimus.
[Troparion of Blessed Basil, Tone 5:]
[O faithful, let us praise a confessor of firm faith, let us
honor with songs a high priest and good shepherd. He did
not fear the infernal malice of the powerful of this world; he
did not bow his head before the enemies of Christian unity.
Therefore, let us with joy cry out to him: rejoice, O bishop
martyr Basil, a luminary of our Church.]

854

Menologion - July

24

The Holy Great Martyr Christine (c. 300).
The Holy Martyrs Boris and Gleb, named
Roman and David at Holy Baptism (1015).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your lamb Christine, O Jesus: see page 553.
Or this, in the same tone:
You became the bride of Christ through the call of the
Gospel, O glorious Christina, you rejected the glory of this
world and the passions of the flesh, and neglected the body
itself, bravely enduring torment. That is why we praise your
sufferings, O martyr of Christ.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were known as a light-seeing dove, having golden
wings, and you flew up to the heights of the heavens, O
honorable Christine. Therefore, we celebrate your glorious
feast, and venerate the place that holds your relics. Divine
healing flows out of them abundantly for soul and body of all.
Troparion, Tone 2:
As upright passion-bearers and true hearers of the Gospel
of Christ, O chaste Roman with innocent David, you did not
oppose the brother who was pulled down by the enemy, and
who killed your bodies while not able to touch your souls. Yet
the evil lover of power weeps, for you are rejoicing with the
angelic choirs, standing before the Holy Trinity praying for
the might of your relatives, that they may be pleasing to God,
and to save the sons of Rus’.
855

Menologion - July

Kontakion, Tone 3:
Shining today is your most glorious memory, O noble
passion-bearers of Christ, Roman and David, summoning us
for the praise of Christ our God. Therefore, hastening to the
shrine of your relics, we receive the gift of healing by your
prayers, O saints, for you are divine Physicians.

25

The Dormition of the Holy Anna, Mother of the
Most Holy Theotokos.
The Memory of the Holy Women Olympiada
and Eupraxia (early 5th Century).

Troparion, Tone 4:
Having given birth to life, you carried in your womb the
immaculate Mother of God, O divinely-wise Anna. Therefore,
you were translated to the heavenly reception, where those
who are happy dwell; now rejoicing in glory, fervently ask
for the cleansing of sins for us, who lovingly honor you, O
ever-blessed one.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Let us celebrate the memory of the grandparents of Christ,
faithfully asking their help to deliver everyone from every
affliction, crying out: “Our God is with us, glorifying those as
it pleases Him.”

26

The Holy Priest-Martyr Hermolaus and his 		
Companions (304).
The Holy Venerable Martyr Paraskeva (2nd Century).
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:

Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
856

Menologion - July

Troparion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 3:
You lived a life according to your name, appropriately as
this is your names-day, showing care for your faith, O passionbearer Parasceva: Therefore, having poured out healing, pray
to God for our souls.
Kontakion of the Priest-Martyr, Tone 4:
Having piously lived as a bishop, you also received a
priest-martyr’s crown. Having destroyed sacrifices to idols,
you became the good shepherd of Christ’s flock, and a true
teacher of Panteleimon, O most wise one. Therefore, we
honor you in song, crying out: Ever deliver us from troubles
through your prayers, O our father Hermolaus.
Kontakion of the Venerable Woman, Tone 8:
Come you faithful, let us praise Paraskeva the passionbearer. She shines with miracles in the world, driving away ten
thousand temptations, and granting the faithful independent
grace. Let us cry out: Rejoice O long-suffering Martyr.

27

The Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon
(304).
Our Father among the saints Clement, the
Wonder-worker, Archbishop of Ohrid (916).
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy passion-bearer and healer Panteleimon, pray to
the merciful God that He may grant to our souls remission of
transgressions.

857

Menologion - July

Or this, Tone 8:
You received an invitation through the lips of Hermolaus
which came from heaven itself. You embraced the faith of your
mother, and you rejoiced when you were killed for it. In return
you received the grace to heal sickness, so heal our infirmities
that we may honor you, O great-martyr Panteleimon.
Kontakion, Tone 5:
You are an imitator of the Merciful One, and He granted
you the grace of healing, O passion-bearer and martyr of Christ
God. Through your prayers, heal our spiritual infirmities, ever
taking away the war of temptations from those who faithfully
cry out to you: Save us, O Lord.

28

The Holy Apostles and Deacons Prochorus, Nicanor,
Timon, and Parmenas.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

You were revealed honorable deacons, eyewitnesses of the
Word, and elect vessels of faith, O glorious Nicanor, Prochorus,
Parmenas, and Timon. Therefore, today we celebrate your
sacred memory, blessing you in gladness of heart.

29

The Holy Martyr Callinicus (250).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Callinicus, O Lord: see page 550.
858

Menologion - July

Kontakion, Tone 2:
O Callinicus, you now worthily inherited the beautiful
heights, for you very much burned with love for Christ in the
fire, where you courageously held firm, and now standing
before Him never cease praying for all of us.

30

The Holy Apostles Silas and Silvanus and their
Companions.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy apostles: see page 548.
Or this, in the same tone:

Let us praise the Apostles Silus, Silvanus, and their
companions. They overcame the deceits of idolatry and taught
the pagans for the faith. They pray unceasingly for those who
keep their memory.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
You were revealed branches of the grapevine of Christ,
bearing clusters of virtues, O wise ones, pouring out the wine
of salvation on us. Receiving it, we are filled with gladness,
celebrating your all-honorable memory. Pray for the remission
of our sins, O Apostles of the Lord.

859

Menologion - July

31

Pre-festive Day of the Procession of the Precious
and Life-creating Cross of the Lord.
The Holy and Righteous Eudocimus (9th Century).
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 1:

Save Your people, O Lord, and bless your inheritance.
Grant victory to your Church over evil and protect Your
people by Your cross.
Troparion of Eudocimus, Tone 4:
Having called you from earth to the heavenly mansion,
the Lord preserves your body whole even after death, O holy
Eudocimus. For you inhabited the abode in both chastity and
purity, O blessed one, having not defiled the flesh. Therefore,
with boldness beseech Christ God to save us.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:
Heaven surpassed the sun in brilliance, for the cross
illumines everything by its radiance. Therefore, You Who are
the Lover of Mankind and the Savior of the world, enlighten
our minds and senses by its power. We have the cross as the
weapon of peace and as an ally.
Kontakion of Eudocimus, Tone 2:
Desiring the highest things, intimately uniting with the
highest, and like a fiery chariot with the divine ascent of virtue,
you perfected the soul, O all-blessed Eudocimus. Having lived
on earth as if bodiless, you pleased the Creator of all.

860

August

1

The Procession of the Wood of the Venerable and
Life-creating Cross.
The Holy Seven Maccabees, their Mother
Solomonia and the Elder Eleazar.

From this date we begin the Fast of the Theotokos, and
continue until the 15th day of this month, on the Feast of
the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos.
Troparion of the Cross, Tone 1:
Save Your people, O Lord: see page 564.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 1:
We beseech You, O Lord; and through the sufferings these
saints endured for Your sake, we implore You to heal all our
infirmities.
Kontakion of the cross, Tone 4:
Christ our God, Who were willingly raised upon the cross,
grant Your mercies to the new people who bear Your Name.
By Your power grant joy to the Church. Give her victory over
evil with Your invincible trophy, the weapon of peace, as an
ally.
861

Menologion - August

Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 2:
Seven pillars of divine wisdom, seven beacons of divine
light, great martyrs before the age of martyrs, pray to God for
all of us, O wise Maccabees, for we observe your memory
with devotion.

2

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy First
Martyr and Archdeacon Stephen (c. 415).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Your head was crowned with a royal crown for the suffering
you endured for Christ God, O proto-martyr Stephen. For
having accused the Judaic outrage, you beheld your Savior
at the right hand of the Father. Therefore, pray for our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
O all-praised Stephen, you were the first to be sown on
earth by the heavenly Divine Gardener; O blessed one, you
were the first on earth to shed blood for Christ, you were the
first to receive the crown of victory from Him in the heavens;
O Proto-martyr, you were the beginning of the suffering
crowned martyrs.

3

Our Venerable Fathers Isaac, Dalmatus, and Faustus
(5th Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:
God of our fathers: see page 549.
862

Menologion - August

Kontakion, Tone 2:
Through fasting you shone like lights, and by your
faith you overthrew heresies, we praise you in hymns Isaac,
Dalmatus, and Faustus, for like men pleasing to Christ you are
praying for all of us.

4

The Holy Seven Children of Ephesus.
The Holy Venerable Martyr Eudoxia (2nd Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:

Great is the wonder of faith, the seven holy youths lived
in the cave as in a royal chamber, and died without corruption;
after a long time they rose again as from sleep, verifying the
resurrection of all men: Therefore by their prayers, O Christ
God, have mercy on us.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Rejecting the corruption of this world, and receiving
the gifts of incorruption, although they died, they remained
without corruption: Therefore after many years they arose,
burying all the unbelief of the wicked. Let us sing to Christ, O
faithful, as we praise them today.

5

Pre-festive Day of the Transfiguration.
The Holy Martyr Eusignius (362).
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:

Let us go forth to welcome the Transfiguration of Christ;
let the faithful joyfully anticipate the feast and exclaim: The
863

Menologion - August

day of divine gladness has arrived; the Lord ascends Mount
Tabor and the beauty of His divinity flashes like lightning.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Eusignius, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:
Today all mortal nature radiates divinity at the divine
Transfiguration and cries out with gladness: Christ is
transfigured, saving all.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Let us praise Eusignius the martyr who conquered evil
by the power of Christ. He clearly proclaimed his faith and
was subjected to vicious torments. But he vanquished the
harshness of the torturer and received a victor’s crown from
God Himself.

6

THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD,
GOD, AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
Troparion, Tone 7:

You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our
God, revealing as much of Your glory to Your disciples as
they could behold. Through the prayers of the Theotokos, let
Your everlasting light also shine upon us sinners. O Giver of
Light, glory to You!
Kontakion, Tone 7:
You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our God,
and Your disciples beheld as much of Your glory as they could
864

Menologion - August

bear, that when they would see You crucified they would
understand that You suffered willingly, so they would preach
to the world that You are truly the radiance of the Father.
Dismissal:
May Christ our true God, Who was transfigured in glory
on Mount Tabor in the presence of his holy disciples and
apostles:

7

The Holy Venerable Martyr Dometius (363).
Troparion of the Feast.
and of the Saint, Tone 4:

After disciplining yourself with prayer and fasting on
the mountain, you destroyed the hosts of spiritual enemies
with the weapon of the cross, O all-blessed one. You bravely
armed yourself again for martyrdom, having destroyed the
apostate with the sword of faith. For the sake of both, you
were crowned by God, O venerable martyr, ever-memorable
Dometius.
Kontakion of the Saint, Tone 6:
Turning from perishable goods and earthly thoughts which
destroy, O venerable martyr Dometius, you were shown to be
the great instructor of monks, not frightened by the fury of the
emperor, who did not want to honor Christ as the true God.
For this you died, singing the hymn: For God is with me, and
no one is against me.

865

Menologion - August

8

The Holy Confessor Emilian, Bishop of Cyzice (820).
Troparion of the Feast.
Troparion of the Saint, Tone 4:
Your life has shown you to your flock: see page 549.
Kontakion of the Saint, Tone 3:

You were revealed as a noble champion of the Trinity.
The Church for whom you suffered glorifies you in song, O
Emilian. Therefore, we honor your memory, to deliver your
servants from pagan invasions.

9

The Holy Apostle Matthias.
Troparion, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Matthias: see page 548.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Having radiated light like the sun into the entire world,
your good news enlightens the pagan temple with grace, O
wonder-bearing Apostle Matthias.

866

Menologion - August

10

The Holy Martyr and Archdeacon Lawrence (258).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Lawrence, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 2:

O God-bearing martyr Lawrence, the foundation of those
who struggle, while your heart was inflamed with divine fire,
you extinguished the fire of your passions until the end. In
faith, you cried out in your sufferings: Nothing can separate
me from the love of Christ.

11

The Holy Martyr Euplus (308).
Troparion, Tone 4:
Your martyr Euplus, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion, Tone 1:

When the love of Christ was your only defense, you stood
in the midst of your fight and said: I endure this struggle
willingly and with confidence! You rejoiced, Euplus, to offer
your head to the sword and thereby complete your course!

867

Menologion - August

12

The Holy Martyrs Photius and Anicetus (305).
In Franciscan and Poor Clare communities:
Our Venerable Mother Clare of Assisi (1253).

On this day we sing the office of our holy venerable
father Maximus the Confessor.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
You crushed the rage of the vicious torturers by your brave
endurance of their torments. Now you rejoice in the courts
of heaven, O blessed martyrs Photius and Anicetus. You are
blessed forever and ever, praying for those who honor you.

13

Our Venerable Father Maximus the Confessor (662).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Guide to Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,
luminary for the world, inspired adornments of monks, O
wise Maximus, harp of the Spirit, you enlightened all by your
teachings; intercede with Christ God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 6:
The thrice-radiant light abiding in your soul showed you
to be a special vessel, O all-blessed one. Revealing a divine
end of incomprehensible understanding, you also speak
868

Menologion - August

about the Holy Trinity to all, O all-blessed Maximus, clearly
preaching the Ever Existing One without beginning.
On this day is the Leavetaking of the Transfiguration.

14

Pre-festive Day of the Dormition.
The Holy Prophet Micah.
Troparion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:

O peoples, clap your hands in anticipation and dance with
faith and joy. Gather together today in eagerness and jubilation,
and let us all exult with godly glee, for the Theotokos, whom
we always glorify in hymns, is about to be taken up in glory
from earth to heaven.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate: see page 548.
Kontakion of the Pre-festive, Tone 4:
In your glorious memory the whole universe, with an
immaterial and diverse spirit, and with gladness, wisely sing
to you: Rejoice, O Virgin, the praise of Christians.
Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 4:
You were enlightened by the blessing of the Holy
Spirit, setting forth in prophecy the pure and immaculate
condescension of Christ our God, O blessed Micah, and
messenger of Christ. Therefore, pray for us who worthily
honor your memory.
869

Menologion - August

The Translation of the Relics of our Venerable
Father Theodosius, Hegumen of the
Monastery of the Caves.
Troparion, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,
luminary for the world, inspired adornments of monks, O wise
Theodosius, Harp of the Spirit, you enlightened all by your
teachings; intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
You are a successor to the fathers, O holy monk, and
you followed them in your life and teachings, your character
and temperance, your prayer and intercession. Since you
have found favor with God, obtain the remission of our sins
and salvation for those who sing to you: Rejoice, O father
Theodosius.

15

THE DORMITION OF THE THEOTOKOS
AND EVER-VIRGIN MARY.
Troparion, Tone 1:

O Theotokos, in giving birth you preserved virginity;
and in your falling asleep you did not forsake the world. You
are the Mother of Life and have been transferred to life, and
through your prayers you deliver our souls from death.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
The grave and death did not detain the Theotokos. She
intercedes without rest and is our unfailing hope of protection;
for he who dwelt in the womb of the Ever-Virgin transferred
to life the Mother of Life.
870

Menologion - August

16

The Translation of the Icon of our Lord, God,
and Savior Jesus Christ, the Icon not
made by human hands, from Edessa to
Constantinople (944).
The Holy Martyr Diomedes (298).
Troparion, Tone 2:

We bow before Your sacred image, O gracious Lord, and
beg forgiveness for our offenses, O Christ our God; for You,
of Your own good will, ascended the cross in Your human
nature to deliver from the enemy’s bondage those whom You
created. Therefore, we gratefully cry out to You: By Your
coming to save the world, O Savior, You have filled all with
joy.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, Diomedes, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Icon, Tone 2:
O indescribable Word of the Father, in Your inexpressible
and divine dispensation towards man, knowing the truthfulness
of Your incarnation, and the unwritten but divinely written
victorious image, we honor it with veneration.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 2:
You vanquished the torturer and became a champion,
crowned with the laurels of victory, O Diomedes. You are an
initiate in the heavenly mysteries of grace and faith and an
unconquerable and faithful martyr.

871

Menologion - August

17

The Holy Martyr Myron (250).
Troparion and Kontakion of the feast.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr Myron, O Lord our God: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 4:

You longed for Christ from your childhood, O glorious
one, and you observed all His divine commandments, and
followed Him with all your strength, O all-honorable Myron.
Together with the angels you diligently pray asking for the
remission of sins for all who honor your memory.

18

The Holy Martyrs Florus and Laurus (2nd Century).
Troparion, Tone 4:

O faithful, let us fittingly praise the all-blessed Florus
together with the most honored Laurus, the all-beautiful,
divinely wise and most radiant pair who earnestly and openly
proclaimed the uncreated Trinity to all! Having suffered even
to the shedding of your blood and been crowned with the
most splendid crowns, entreat Christ God that He may save
our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 8:
Today, the whole world gloriously honors Florus and
Laurus as martyrs of devotion and divinely-wise athletes of
Christ. May we receive grace and mercy through their prayers
and be delivered from tribulations, dangers, wrath, and sorrow
on the day of Judgment.
872

Menologion - August

19

The Holy Martyr Andrew the Tribune and his 		
Companions.
Troparion of the Saints, Tone 5:

You left behind the glory of earthly rank and inherited the
Kingdom of Heaven. You enhanced crowns of incorruption
as with beautiful stones, leading an assembly of athletes to
Christ. Holy General Andrew, you found Christ with the
choirs of angels, the unsetting sun, the unfading light. Ever
pray to Him together with those who suffered with you that
He may save our souls.
Kontakion of the Saints, Tone 2:
Standing before the Lord in prayer like a star before the
sun, you saw the desired treasure of the Kingdom, filled with
ineffable joy. Throughout the ages, General Andrew, you
forever sing with the angels to the immortal King. Together
with them, pray unceasingly for all of us.

20

The Holy Prophet Samuel.
Troparion of the Prophet, Tone 2:
As we celebrate: see page 548.
Or this in the same tone:

The pure gift was given to the barren womb, and offered
as a burnt offering to your Lord, you served Him in reverence
and truth. That is why we honor you, prophet of God Samuel,
as a suppliant for our souls.

873

Menologion - August

Kontakion of the Prophet, Tone 8:
You were a gift of great worth given to God before your
conception, O blessed one; you served Him like an angel
from your infancy. It was given you to announce future things
beforehand. Therefore, we cry out to you: Rejoice, O prophet
of God Samuel, the great high priest.

21

The Holy Apostle Thaddeus.
The Holy Martyr Bassa (3rd Century).
Troparion of the Apostle, Tone 3:
O holy Apostle Thaddeus: see page 548.
Or this, Tone 3:

Edessa rejoices today at its baptism through you. Abgar has
been freed from passion and praises you. We join in his hymn,
and we sing to you: fill our lives with spiritual happiness and
heal our passions through your prayers, O Apostle Thaddeus.
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your lamb Bassa, O Jesus: see page 553.
Kontakion of the Apostle, Tone 4:
O Apostle Thaddaeus, the Church recognizes you as a
brilliant star, and she is ever illumined by your miracles. Save
those who keep your memory with faith.

874

Menologion - August

Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 1:
You put out the fires of the torments by the dew of the
Spirit, O blessed saint. You were taken into the divine and
spiritual light, and after your passing, you shower cures upon
us, suppressing the urges of passions through your prayers.

22

The Holy Martyr Agathonicus and his Companions.
Troparion of the feast.
And of the Saints, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord our God: see page 551.
Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 1:

Heeding the good call, O divinely-wise one, you
renounced the beliefs of evil men, not being afraid of torment,
O glorious Agathonicus. Therefore, you became an heir of
blessings, and you, together with those who suffered with you,
received worthy crowns.

23

The Holy Martyr Lupus (306).
The Holy Martyr Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons (202).
Troparion of the Martyr, Tone 4:
Your martyr, O Lord our God: see page 550.

875

Menologion - August

Kontakion of the Martyr, Tone 1:
You have become a brilliant star to guide the earth,
heralding the dawn of Christ. You wiped out innocence, and
you give us light, O long-suffering Lupus. Pray unceasingly
for all of us.
On this day is the Leave-taking of the Feast of the
Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos.

24

The Holy Priest-Martyr Eutyches.
Troparion, Tone 4:
You shared in the apostles’ way of life: see page 551.
Kontakion, Tone 3:

O Eutychius, you were co-enthroned with the Apostles,
and were the beauty of the bishops. You were glorified as
a martyr. You shone like the sun, enlightening all, and you
destroyed the deep night of godlessness. Therefore, we honor
you as the truly divine, holy mystic of Christ.
[The Blessed Martyr and Priest-Monk Dominic Trčka.]
[Troparion of Blessed Dominic]
[Lord, our God, Who bring forth in every age the martyrs
who bear witness to Your boundless love, You gave Your
Priest-Martyr Dominic Methodius outstanding bravery in the
face of trial and torture. May his prayers for Your Byzantine
Catholic Church give strength to the Faith for which he gave
his life and keep us true to You, O God, forever.]
876

Menologion - August

25

The Return of the Relics of the Holy Apostle 		
Bartholomew.
The Holy Apostle Titus.
Troparion, Tone 3:

O holy Apostles: see page 548.
Kontakion of Bartholomew, Tone 4:
You appeared as a great sun to the Church, with the
brilliance of teaching and awesome wonders, enlightening
those who sings hymns to you, O Bartholomew, Apostle of
the Lord.
Kontakion of Titus, Tone 2:
O Apostle, you were revealed as the companion of Paul,
and with him you foretold us the word of divine grace, O Titus,
preacher of mysteries and ever-memorable. We, therefore, cry
out to you: Never cease to intercede for all of us.

26

The Holy Martyrs Adrian and Natalie.
Troparion of the Martyrs, Tone 4:
Your martyrs, O Lord: see page 551.
Or this, Tone 3:

You saved a treasure of great wealth, the divine and true
faith. Turning away from the foolish actions of your ancestors,
you followed in the steps of the Master. You were enriched
with divine gifts, O glorious Adrian, and now we ask you to
be generous to us.
877

Menologion - August

Kontakion, Tone 4:
Adrian, martyr of Christ, you kept the divine words of
your Godly-wise wife in your heart. With her you fervently
endured suffering and received the crown of martyrdom.

27

Our Venerable Father Pimen.
Troparion, Tone 8:
Your abundant tears: see page 667.
Kontakion, Tone 4:

Enlightened by your asceticism, O venerable father, today
the memory of your splendid struggles has dawned. This
gladdens the souls of the pious, O our venerable Godly-wise
father Pimen.

28

Our Venerable Father Moses the Ethiopian.
Our Holy Father Augustine, Bishop of Hippo (430).
The Holy Martyr Gebre Michael, Priest of Ethiopia
(1855).
In monasteries: On this day is celebrated The 		
Synaxis of the Venerable Fathers of the Monastery
of the Caves who repose in the further caves.
Troparion, Tone 1:

You made the wilderness your dwelling, O father Moses,
the bearer of God. You became an angel in the flesh and a
wonder-worker. Through fasts, vigils, and prayers, you
obtained heavenly gifts to heal the sick and to sanctify the
souls of those who come to you in faith. Glory to the One
Who gave you strength! Glory to the One Who crowned
878

Menologion - August

you! Glory to the One Who through your intercession grants
healing to all!
Troparion of Augustine, Tone 8:
Guide to Orthodoxy: see page 555.
Kontakion, Tone 4:
Having curbed the Moors and pursuits of the demons, in
thought you shone brightly as the sun, with the light of your
way of life and teaching, catechizing our souls.
Kontakion of Augustine, Tone 2:
We praise you with resounding voices, O heavenly trumpet
of wisdom. You are the harmonious organ of theology, O most
blessed father Augustine. You have given us rich knowledge
of Christ’s faith, and you have increased the flock in the
Church. You now take your rest with the angels and still pray
unceasingly for all of us.

29

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE
BEHEADING OF THE HOLY PROPHET,
FORERUNNER, AND BAPTIST JOHN.
Troparion, Tone 2:

The memory of the righteous is celebrated with praise,
but for you, O Forerunner, the Lord’s testimony is enough.
You were shown to be more honorable than the prophets since
you were deemed worthy to baptize in the waters the Lord you
had proclaimed. Therefore, you fought for the truth, and with
joy proclaimed the good news to those in Hades, that God has
appeared in the flesh to take away the sins of the world and to
grant us great mercy.
879

Menologion - August

Kontakion, Tone 5:
The glorious beheading of the Forerunner was part of
God’s saving plan that the coming of the Savior might be
announced even to those in Hades. Let Herodias mourn for
she sought a lawless murder because she loved neither the
Law of God nor eternal life, but only this false and fleeting
life.

30

[Post-festive Day of the Beheading of the Holy Baptist
John.]
Our Holy Fathers Alexander (340), John (595), 		
and Paul the Younger (784), Patriarchs of 		
Constantinople.
Troparion of the Forerunner.
and the Troparion of the Hierarchs, Tone 4:

God of our fathers: see page 550.
Kontakion of the Forerunner, Tone 4:
Herod sinned in giving your precious head, O Forerunner,
to his wife. Herodias danced at first but now weeps, while
Herod weeps and laments. We prostrate before it and all filled
with joy.
Kontakion of the Hierarchs, Tone 8:
Crucified by the love of Christ, O glorious ones, and
accepting His yoke, you revealed yourselves followers in His
footsteps by your way of life, and you became participants of
880

Menologion - August

His divine glory, O Godly-wise Alexander, with the wonderful
John and the glorious Paul. As you stand before His throne,
earnestly pray for our souls.

31

The Deposition of the Venerable Sash of the
Theotokos in Chalkoprateia (942).
Troparion, Tone 8:

Ever-Virgin Theotokos and protection of the human race,
you gave the robe and cincture of your most pure body to
your city as a powerful protection. These garments remained
incorrupt because of your virginal childbearing. Time and
nature are renewed in you. Therefore, we pray that you may
grant peace to the whole world and great mercy to our souls.
Kontakion, Tone 2:
Your God-pleasing womb, O Theotokos, was girded with
your honorable belt, granting invincible power and abundantly
good treasure to your city, O only Ever-Virgin who has given
birth.

881

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

882

This is the
Hymn of Saint Ambrose,
Bishop of Milan:
We praise You, O God, we acknowledge You to be the
Lord, and all the earth worships You, the Father everlasting. To
You all angels, the heavens and all the powers, the cherubim
and seraphim, cry out in unison with their unceasing voice:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. Both heaven and earth
are full of the majesty of Your glory. The glorious chorus
of the apostles praises You. The praiseworthy company
of the prophets praises You. The white-robed army of the
martyrs praises You. The holy Church throughout the world
acknowledges You: the Father of an infinite majesty; Your
adorable, true, and only Son; and the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete.
You are the King of Glory, O Christ! You are the everlasting
Son of the Father. When You took upon Yourself to deliver
the human race, You did not disdain the Virgin’s womb. When
You had overcome the sting of death, You opened the kingdom
of heaven to all believers. You are seated at the right hand of
God, in the glory of the Father and we believe that You will
come to be our Judge. We, therefore, pray You to help Your
servants whom You have redeemed with Your precious blood.
Make them to reign with Your saints in glory everlasting. O
Lord, save Your people, and bless Your inheritance, govern
us and lift us up forever. Day by day we bless You, and we
883

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

praise Your Name forever, to the ages of ages. Grant, O Lord,
to keep us today without sin. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have
mercy on us. Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as we have
placed our hope in You. In You, O Lord, have we hoped; let us
never be confounded. Amen.

884

Introduction to the Monastic Rule of Prayer
for those who wish to make use of it
and who are living in the world.
Whether those persons, male and female, are illiterate
or for the sake of those persons who do not have the texts
of the church hymnody inasmuch as they are in villages or
countryside, or in cities where they are unable to go to hear
the church services, and the same Rule is not understood to
be burdensome work, but those who have a desire to please
God, and, through cleansing of the heart of thoughts by prayer
and fasting, that is, to make many repetitions of the prayer in
stillness.
Beginning this rule, make prostrations, and after having
made bows, stand again, and say this:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins, and have mercy on me!
O Lord, You are my Creator, have mercy on me!
O Lord, forgive me, for I have sinned without number.
and:
O Virgin Lady, Theotokos, save me!
My holy guardian angel, protect me from all harm!
Holy (your patron saint) pray to God for me!
885

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

For the Evening Hymn, the Jesus Prayer:
Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a
sinner. One hundred, and twenty-five prostrations.
For Compline, the Prayer: fifty, and twelve prostrations.
For the Canon and the Akathist of the Theotokos, the
Prayer: two hundred, and twenty-nine prostrations.
For the Canon and Parakleisis of the Theotokos, the
Prayer: seventy, and twelve prostrations.
For the Canon of the Guardian Angel, the Prayer: fifty,
and seven prostrations.
For a weekday Canon, the Prayer: thirty, and five
prostrations.
For the Midnight Service, the Prayer: one hundred, and
twenty-five prostrations.
For Matins, the Prayer: three hundred, and fifty
prostrations.
For the First Hour, the Prayer: fifty, and seven prostrations.
For the Third Hour, for the Sixth Hour, and for the Ninth
Hour, likewise the Prayer: fifty, and seven prostrations.
For the Typical Psalms, the Prayer: one hundred, and ten
prostrations.

The End, and Glory to God!

886

PASCHALIA
Year from
Year from
Pascha in
Pascha in
Creation of
Christ		
the Julian
the Greg.
The World			Calendar
Calendar
_________________________________________________
7529		2021		May 2		April 4
7530		

2022		

April 24

April 17

7531		

2023		

April 16

April 9

7532		

2024 *		

May 5		

Mar. 31

7533		

2025		

April 20

April 20

7534		

2026		

April 12

April 5

7535		2027		May 2		Mar. 28
7536		

2028 *		

April 16

April 16

7537		2029		April 8		April 1
7538		

2030		

April 28

April 21

7539		

2031		

April 13

April 13

887

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Year from
Year from
Pascha in
Pascha in
Creation of
Christ		
the Julian
the Greg.
the World			Calendar
Calendar
_________________________________________________
7540		

2032 *		

May 2		

Mar. 28

7541		

2033		

April 24

April 17

7542		

2034		

April 9		

April 9

7543		

2035		

April 29

Mar. 25

7544		

2036 *		

April 20

April 13

7545		

2037		

April 5		

April 5

7546		

2038		

April 25

April 25

7547		

2039		

April 17

April 10

7548		

2040 *		

May 6		

April 1

7549		

2041		

April 21

April 21

7550		

2042		

April 13

April 6

7551		2043		May 3		Mar. 29
7552		

2044 *		

April 24

April 17

7553		

2045		

April 9		

April 9

888

PASCHALIA

Year from
Year from
Pascha in
Pascha in
Creation of
Christ		
the Julian
the Greg.
the World			Calendar
Calendar
_________________________________________________
7554		

2046		

April 29

Mar. 25

7555		

2047		

April 21

April 14

7556		

2048 *		

April 5		

April 5

7557		

2049		

April 25

April 18

7558		

2050		

April 17

April 10

7559		2051		May 7		April 2
7560		

2052* 		

April 21

April 21

7561		

2053		

April 13

April 6

7562		2054		May 3		March 29
					* Denotes Leap Year

889

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

[The original colophon in the Church Slavonic edition:]
In glory and praise of Almighty God and all His Saints:
observing the order of the Holy Ecumenical
Pontiff Pope Pius XI, by His successor Pope Pius XII,
the labor of the Holy Congregation
for the Eastern Churches,
this book, Часоловъ, is approved,
in the God-saved city of Elder Rome,
at the printing press of the Grottaferatta Monastery,
in the year from the creation of the world 7458, but
from the Birth according to the flesh of God the Word,
1950, Indiction 3, the month of August.
▬●●▬

890

The Ruthenian Recension
History
The “Liturgical Books according to the Ruthenian
Recension for Ukrainians and Ruthenians” (Libri Liturgici
Recensio Ruthena pro Ucrainis et Ruthenis) are typical
editions of the liturgical books published by the Sacred
Congregation for the Eastern Churches of the Holy See
of Rome. They were issued from 1940 to 1975 in Church
Slavonic according to the liturgical practices of the historic
Metropolitanate of Kiev and the Churches sui iuris, and
eparchies formed from the historic Eparchy of Mukačevo. The
Holy See of Rome issued these texts in response to the request
of the Ukrainian and Ruthenian Catholic bishops following
their meeting in 1932. This volume is an English translation
of the Часословъ (Časoslov). The Sacred Congregation for
the Eastern Churches published the Book of Hours in two
editions in 1950, the regular edition as translated here, and an
expanded edition which appeared in the form of a Великий
Часословъ (Velikyj Časoslov) or Great Book of Hours
which included additional material: the Inter-hours and the
Panaghia, the Common Служба (Služba) for feasts and prefeasts of Christ and the Common Служба (Služba) for feasts
of the Theotokos, the Canon to the Guardian Angel, a Canon
of Repentance in Tone Six to the Most Holy Theotokos, the
Служба (Služba) for the Departed for Friday evening and
891

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Saturday morning, a Common Служба (Služba) for all days
to our Lord Jesus Christ, the texts of the Eleven Resurrection
Gospels of Sunday Matins with the eleven Exapostilaria and
the Gospel stichera, a Typica for the Sunday of Pascha, a
synaxarion for each day in the Menologion as well as fasting
regulations, the Order of the Canon and Prayers before the
reception of Holy Communion and the Thanksgiving Prayers
after the reception of Holy Communion, and an alphabetical
index of saints. This larger version of the Часословъ expanded
the contents of Daily Matins with the addition of the complete
texts of the eight Old Testament scriptural canticles and the
New Testament canticle of Zechariah along with the canticle
of the Theotokos. There were also other differences: the
Midnight Hymn to the Theotokos which was presented at
the conclusion of Morning Prayer in the smaller volume, was
omitted in the larger one. The larger Часословъ (Časoslov)
also omitted the Canon of the Hodegetria Mother of God.
The Common Служба (Služba) to the Archangels and Angels
commonly sung on Mondays, presented a different collection
of stichera at Psalm 140 of Vespers and an alternate Canon to
the Bodiless Ones in place of the Canon to the Archangels in
the smaller Часословъ.
The only previous attempt to issue a Book of Hours in
English according to the typical edition of the Ruthenian
Recension was the Horologion, Volume 1, 1967 and
Horologion: The Days of Lent and Life Volume 2, 1968.
These were produced by the Byzantine Franciscan Friars of
Holy Protection Monastery, New Canaan, Connecticut, with
the blessing of the Custos of Saint Mary of the Angels. These
volumes were mostly complete, omitting daily Morning
and Evening Prayers and with several other lacunae. The
translation was their own, primarily the work of the Friars
Marion Francis Kowala and George Appleyard, and they
892

The Ruthenian Recension

used the psalms from the Jerusalem Bible. Another attempt
to produce an English language translation of the Часословъ
was part of an initiative of Bishop Milan Šašik, C.M., Bishop
of Mukačevo. On May 30, 2013 (Protocol No. 086/13),
Bishop Šašik had enlisted the services of Jack Figel and
Eastern Christian Publications to produce parallel EnglishChurch Slavonic study editions of the collection of liturgical
books published by the Sacred Congregation of the Eastern
Churches according to the Ruthenian Recension. The first
section of the Великий Часословъ (Velikyj Časoslov) 1950,
with an English translation facing each Church Slavonic page,
was published in 2017.

This Edition
This present volume uses existing translations from
the revised translations promulgated by the Metropolitan
Archbishop and Bishops of the Byzantine Ruthenian
Metropolitan Church of Pittsburgh on January 6, 2007,
and any subsequent official texts. These translations were
revisions of previously issued texts according to the Ruthenian
Recension which received approbation of the Metropolitan
Archbishop or an eparchial bishop of the Byzantine Ruthenian
Metropolitan Church of Pittsburgh. These texts were based
on the translation style of the seminal text approved by the
Holy See December 10, 1964, The Divine Liturgy of our
Father among the Saints John Chrysostom published by the
Byzantine Liturgical Conference 1965 with the blessing of
the eparchial bishops of Pittsburgh and Passaic. That text,
in turn, followed the arrangement and layout of the typical
edition of that liturgy issued in 1941 by the Congregation of
the Eastern Churches with the exception of the psalms. For
the psalms for the 2007 revision, the Inter-eparchial Liturgical
893

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

Commission of the Byzantine Ruthenian Metropolitan Church
of Pittsburgh chose to use The Psalms— A New Translation,
The Grail, 1963. Therefore, the Grail Psalms are used in this
volume and are printed in verse as printed in the Grail texts.
In the typical editions of the Ruthenian Recension in Church
Slavonic from the Congregation of the Eastern Churches the
psalms are set in paragraph form. The psalms are the inspired
Word of God given to us to use as the words of our prayer to
God, so it is presented in verse to facilitate our prayer, but
also the psalms are God’s Word to us. The latter function
is as a reading from the Sacred Scripture for each horarium
of prayer and to facilitate this function it is understandable
they would be printed in paragraph form. Texts that had been
used unofficially in the Ruthenian Church and had become
popularized, but which were not in accord with the Church
Slavonic texts, were reworked. The troparia and kontakia for
the Menologion which did not appear in official texts have
been newly translated from the Church Slavonic.
The prayers at the conclusion of each Служба (Služba) for
every day of the week in the Canonicon have never appeared
in English. These required a fresh translation and appear in
this volume for the first time in English.
In this present volume, the capitalization style of the 1965
translation and subsequent translations are used for pronouns
referring to the Godhead. This style seemed more respectful,
and it is easier when praying to quickly understand to whom
the pronouns refer: God, the Theotokos or a saint. In accord
with the 2007 revision texts, Bohorodica has been translated as
Theotokos while Mati Boža has been translated as Mother of
God. In addition, the typical edition usually uses the vocative
form of the title father, Отчє, when inviting the celebrating
priest to bless. However, there are also instances in which
894

The Ruthenian Recension

Master, Владыко, is used and these are specified in the text.  
This English language translation of the Часословъ
(Časoslov) follows the pattern established in the typical edition
regarding the red-letter incipit at the beginning of psalms,
the priestly prayers, and the initial sticheron of the weekday
services of the Canonicon, the Service to Archangels and
Angels. Additionally, the Church Slavonic edition also uses
a red-letter incipit for certain psalm verses of the Polyeleos
of Sunday and Festal Matins and also for the First Kathisma
at Vespers. Its usage in those places is to indicate how those
psalms may be abbreviated, such that only the verse beginning
with the red-letter incipit may be chanted in the abbreviated
form.
It should be noted that the typical edition of the Часословъ
(Časoslov) varies in the usage of the prayers commonly called
the “Usual Beginning Prayers,” Начало Обычноє (Načalo
obyčnoje). In some cases, they are presented completely,
while in other places the prayers are only referenced in
abbreviated form in the rubrics, prescribing that the prayers
be prayed in full. In yet other cases, the order of prayer begins
with the invitatory, “Come, let us worship” such as for the
First Hour. In the latter instance, the Часословъ (Časoslov)
expects that the First Hour would follow immediately at the
completion of Matins and thus the Usual Beginning Prayers
would be omitted. However, if the First Hour is prayed
separately instead of immediately following Matins, the Usual
Beginning Prayers should be prayed in their entirety. Another
variation is seen in Parakleisis, where the rubric indicates that
following the priestly blessing, “Blessed is our God,” Psalm
142 is prayed, yet the Usual Beginning Prayers are expected
to be prayed before Psalm 142.
When a translation of a typical edition is made to a
vernacular, the formatting of the text must be made in accord
895

The Book of Hours: Časoslov

with the original. This is faithfully observed here, with
the exception of the psalms as mentioned above, and the
following other exceptions. Additional words in the rubrics,
titles of prayers, or other notes which appear in other editions,
or are intended to help or clarify this current edition, are in
brackets. Prayers such as texts for recent beatifications or
commemorations observed only in the United States which
do not appear in the Ruthenian Recension of the Часословъ
(Časoslov) are enclosed in brackets. For any prayer that is a
complete quotation from Sacred Scripture or where an entire
verse is a scriptural text, the reference appears in brackets.
Scriptural quotations embedded within the texts of prayers,
canons, stichera, troparia and kontakia and not indicated.
As expected, the typical edition of the Часословъ
(Časoslov) does not have detailed rubrics for the priestcelebrant. These are found exactly where one would expect,
the Лїтурґїконъ сїєсть Служєбникъ (Liturgikon sijest’
Služebnik), Rome, 1952. In that volume are found the rubrics
for the priest-celebrant for all the services of the Divine
Office, including the special forms of Vespers and Matins for
the Great Fast, Great and Holy Week, and Pascha. Indications
for Sunday and Festal Matins and Vespers which allow for
the ministry of a deacon are also included. Another source for
rubrics, specifically for Sunday and Festal Vespers and Matins,
are found in the Ordo Celebrationis, Rome, 1944 (English
and Latin/English editions by Eastern Christian Publications,
1996 and 2007).
The headers, artwork and icon engravings are from the
larger edition of the Часословъ (Časoslov), Rome, 1950.

896

